First ball has gone for a six but this isn't IPL,it's a test match
June 1, 2014 (The Times of India)

In Mumbai, where I live, I don’t really get invited to many functions and parties of consequence. I eat too many carbs and sleep too early to be invited to Bollywood bashes. My air-kissing is too sloppy for page 3 soirees. Needless to say, an invite from the Government of India for the oath-taking ceremony of the new PM sent me into a tizzy. Nonetheless, I did make it.
Many asked me what I felt about the ceremony. Here’s my candid take on it. First, the serious part. There were many, many things right about the event. The most incredible aspect was the meaning added to what is, after all, a ceremonial event. There were many firsts. Not just politicians and government officials, but people from a cross-section of society were present. The gathering had spiritual leaders, CEOs, artists, actors, prominent citizens and party workers. What does it mean? Why the big crowd? Is it just grandeur? The answer lies in what my mother told me about why Indian weddings are big affairs. The big wedding, she explained, would make the couple realize that their union was a big deal, the world was witness to it, and they, in turn, were accountable to the world now. Modi’s gesture of bringing several stakeholders in society to the event brought in a similar accountability. It is one thing when a minister takes an oath in front of an insider group of politicians, quite another when he or she does it in front of thousands of people. It doesn’t guarantee integrity . However, it signals what is expected from them. While on this, I must say the media using terms like `plum’ and ‘reward’ to describe allocation of ministries is disturbing. Perhaps it is because of past experience, where ministries were given as gifts or `plum’ fruits to be plucked. However, it’s a job, a very important one. It is not jaagir distribution.
The second achievement of the event was the subtle but effective diplomacy achieved. We invited our neighbours. Nearly all SAARC leaders were present, including the Pakistan prime minister. Relations with Pakistan have improved more in the past week than they did in the last five years. When I saw our PM Modi sit with the eight-odd national leaders, I couldn’t help notice one thing. Of all our neighbours, we have the best, most effective, and probably the only real democracy . While the not-too-distant Thailand grappled with a coup, we changed our government in a peaceful manner.
The event showcased it. Hundreds of MPs were present in the crowd, each chosen by lakhs of people on the basis of hope and aspiration. Even Congress leaders attended. I don’t know how easy it was for them, but they kept a smile through the event and met everyone with grace. It felt nice. We are after all, one country . It’s not perfect, but it is not so bad either. We bash our politics every day. However, the event allowed all of us to feel a little proud of the fact that somehow, all of us, we make this democracy work.
The third important aspect -the ministerial allocations -warrants a separate discussion and analysis. However, the fact that the cabinet is compact and younger is a good thing. So is a larger representation of women.
There were other nice touches. Post event, simple snack counters were set up. Guests had dhokla, basic sandwiches and cookies along with tea in cups that sported the Ashoka lion emblem. This lent a touch of modesty to an otherwise larger-than-life event. No elaborate dishes were cooked overnight, and no grand wedding type counters were put up. It was a big event, but humble.
Was everything perfect? No. Some said the oaths were too long, and repeated four dozen times, seemed even longer. Perhaps the ceremony is not designed for mass public viewing. Or perhaps we are spoilt now. Perhaps the ministers can take oath like websites. Just accept the terms and conditions, click the button and get on with it.
Also, with so many important people in a big crowd, security seemed less than what one would expect. Maybe I am paranoid, but we have to realize that we have many enemies of our democracy. The new government has come after a big success in the elections. However success also breeds something ugly called envy . Let’s remain careful.
Anyway, these are minor glitches in what was otherwise a great start to a new government. Of course, this is a long Test match, and we have to see the scorecard after a while. But let’s face it. With the oath-taking event, the government has hit the first ball for a six.