It was 1996. And I was in the eighth standard. Girls weren’t pulling down socks to flaunt their legs yet. Guys were still to discover the wonders of hair gels. And girls were still not their top priority. We were all busy sprinkling ink on each other’s shirts and sharing lunches. The happy pre-puberty days. And that’s exactly when I met her. I saw the face, which imprinted itself on my brain for many years to come. Well, to be true, I didn’t meet her, not exactly. I just saw her across the room full of rowdy and shouting eighth-standard students. ‘Nisha?’ the teacher had called out. ‘Yes, ma’am,’ she had responded in her chirpy voice. How did she look? She was like the first breeze of autumn, like the sparkling sun after a long cold night; she was a midsummer night’s dream. She barely came up to my shoulders, her eyes were darker than the blackest night, her soft pink lips seemed to be made out of candy, her cute steps across the floor, as she walked around, would make my day. I still remember her perfectly well in our school uniform with a pink muffler around her neck. And the reddish winter glow on her cheeks. Ah! How did I look? I was fat, dark and ridiculously ugly. Like. Totally. Ugly. It was as if God had something against me. If he had to make me so ugly, he should have played with my mind too and made me have a crush on someone as ugly as I was, someone with freckles and unruly hair, maybe a lazy eye! Why her? Why Nisha? Why the cutest, chirpiest girl in the class? Anyway, seven years later, in the winter of 2003, I had just turned eighteen. It was my last year in school and somehow, I had managed to grow even fatter and uglier, and she had only grown prettier. She was no longer the girl I had first seen seven years back. She had grown positively womanly, if you know what I mean. She was cute then, but she was irresistibly beautiful now. Her lips had grown pinker, her eyes were wider and they sparkled even more now, her hair was now long and worn in a style far beyond her age. All these years the gap between her social standing and popularity and mine had just kept widening. Although I had grown taller and she was still short and hopped around like a pocket-sized bunny, it didn’t make her any less un-gettable. It was the last year and I was in the S.A. dilemma. What is a Screwed Anyway dilemma? It’s something that almost every guy has faced in his lifetime. It’s almost as common as the Asshole Boyfriend phenomenon.
What is the Asshole Boyfriend phenomenon? It’s when every girl you like eventually ends up going out with the guy you hate. Simple, right? Now back to the Screwed Anyway dilemma. The girl is out of your league—but she is single—you ask her out—she refuses—you are screwed! The girl is out of your league—and she is single—someone else asks her out—you are screwed! Now the good news about the first one is that you don’t feel choked about your feelings and you don’t regret that you didn’t tell the person you love about how you felt about them. And I just had to tell her! Never give in to this feeling, nothing comes out of telling the person you love that you love him or her. It’s bullshit, it’s an urban legend. After doing it, you realize it’s better to live on the tiny hope that maybe she loved you, rather than being rejected and humiliated outright. But I was just an ugly, fat kid. What did I know about these complexities? All I knew was that she was the girl of my dreams and I liked her to bits. Let’s just rewind a bit to tell you what had happened in the last seven years of my secret relationship with Nisha, a relationship about which Nisha herself knew nothing about. I loved her like crazy. Within the first week of seeing her, I knew her phone number, the street she lived on, what her parents did, what bus route she took, almost everything there was to be known about her! Though, getting all this information seems regular right now, the year was 1996 and things were different back then! As time went by, my obsession escalated. After a year, and for the next seven years, I walked two kilometres every day after school so that I could share the same bus route. For the next seven years, I always took two schoolbags so that I could take a seat in two rows and decide later which row would give me a clearer view of her, after she took her seat. I did these things on a very regular basis, and now that I think of it, I guess I should have gone to a doctor instead. Anyway, back then I wasn’t a big extrovert, but by the time 2003 came along, I had retreated so far into my shell that I had problems even engaging in everyday conversations with people. Why did that happen? My obsession, now at dizzy levels, made me believe that Nisha would hear every word I say, and that I needed to measure my words before saying them out loud. And that is when, deep down, I knew for certain, that a girl like her, who hung around with cooler kids with gel in their hair and motorcycles parked outside the school, wouldn’t even give a passing thought to someone like me. She had a whole army of better boys who catered to her every whim and fancy; she was a pampered kid. Had it been left to me, I would have carried her around in my schoolbag to prevent her from the torture of walking. Man! I did need to go to a psychiatrist back then. But it was around that time that I realized that I was getting a little overboard, that it was just a crush and I had to get over it,
especially since my grades had started to slip to unacceptable levels. I started to concentrate a little more on my engineering entrance examinations, putting everything else aside for a little while. It did soften my preoccupation with her. Sometimes I thought it would have been a lot easier for me, had she started going out with somebody. But that’s just pure speculation; I might just have killed myself, metaphorically speaking. I clearly remember; it was the last week of our school when I mustered up the courage to go to her, my heart in my mouth, readying myself up for rejection. It was mostly out of panic because I felt I would never see her again. Who knew Facebook would burst into the scene in three years and you would always be in touch with friends you never wished you had! Anyway, she was almost set to go to some college in Delhi University, surrounded by boys and girls as cute as she was, and I was keeping my fingers crossed for my entrance examinations. I just had to tell her. I couldn’t have chosen a worse time, though. It was only later that it came to my knowledge that there were three more guys, all of whom were better than I was (because being worse than me was kind of impossible), who had asked her out around those very days; all of them were turned down. ‘Umm … err … hi …’ I said. She smiled as she always did and said, ‘Hi, Joy.’ She fucking knows my name! She fucking knows my name! Obviously she does, you asshole. You have shared the same class since you didn’t even know what an erection was. ‘Hi,’ I said and shut up. I started rubbing my palms together which were sweating by now. I shivered. This was the best moment in our seven-year-long secret relationship. We had finally said Hi, our first real conversation. ‘Yes?’ she said, still smiling. ‘Umm … nothing … I just wanted to tell you that … that … I think you are very nice …’ I said. My face flushed red and my head spun. Yes, in those days, nice and cute were the only words we all used. Asking a girl out was a really big deal and it took only a stud or a man crazed with love to do it. Having a girlfriend was unheard of, like a myth, something that only happened in movies, or in colleges. ‘Well … thank you,’ she said and smiled. ‘Joy, I need to go. I will talk to you later.’ ‘S … sure,’ I mumbled as she walked away from me. I wasn’t screwed. She was still single. I had told her what I wanted to … almost, and she had smiled. I was a winner! My happiness was shortlived; a few minutes later, I saw her talking to a few of her friends in the corner. I didn’t know whether it was just my mind playing games with me, but I saw her pointing at me and smiling, and her friends were laughing. Maybe, they were right in doing so. I had been fool enough to have a glimmer of hope that something would come out of me telling Nisha that I liked her. I turned away from them and spent the next two hours in the washroom crying like a little girl. And felt disgusted with myself.
I tried to erase the memory of that incident ever since. But it only deepened the inferiority complex and exacerbated my fear of talking to girls. The incident kept reminding me that I was ugly … and worthless, and that I wasn’t fit to be loved by any girl. Though two days later, on the farewell night, I got a picture clicked with her, my first with a girl, and every time I look at that blurred picture today, I think of her. And the day she smiled … And when her friends had laughed at me. Things changed thereafter. Pretty drastically.