‘You have no intention of studying, do you?’ I asked her as she sat on the computer, poring over someone’s Orkut profile. ‘Not really,’ she said, blowing up her chewing gum till it burst all over her face. She was addicted to chewing gum, and I never found her not chewing one. The first drawer of her study table had all flavours of chewing gums from Wrigley’s to Big Babool to Center Fresh; she was quite a chewing gum gourmet. ‘I always wanted to know, Sheeny. How come you are single?’ ‘Umm … I don’t know. The good guys never come up to me,’ she said, switched off the computer and turned towards me. ‘And now that you’re my boyfriend, even the bad ones don’t. I don’t mind it much though. It’s only when all my friends start to talk about their boyfriends and the sweet things they do for them, I feel left out.’ ‘Maybe you were always too good for the good guys. Maybe they think they don’t have a shot at you.’ ‘Aww, you think so?’ ‘Most certainly,’ I said. ‘You are cute and you’re smart!’ ‘Thank you,’ she said, touching my arm again. ‘You are just being sweet!’ ‘No. I am serious. I would have never thought that I had a chance with you. Really. It would be awesome if I were dating you for real!’ I regretted those words as soon as they left my mouth; she stopped chewing and looked at me, and I was about to apologize but she came and sat next to me, and said, ‘For real?’ ‘Yes,’ I responded, trembling. ‘That would be cool. I, anyway, really like you,’ she said, blushing. ‘And you are a nice guy, fun to be with, and you are kind of hot. You’re not too tall either!’ My face felt warm, I was blushing. She came closer. I repeated the sentence in my head again. Nobody had called me hot before! There has to be some mistake. ‘Thank you. And you are pretty awesome, too. So …’ I said, not knowing what to say. ‘So?’ she asked, her eyes big and expectant, like a little schoolgirl from those Manga comics. ‘Will you go out with me? Like for real?’ I said, sweat on my brow, panicking; I felt the walls close in on me. ‘Umm, be my girlfriend? A real girlfriend? Not just to tell your friends?’ ‘I expected you to say something better,’ she chuckled, ‘but this will do! Yes!’ She hugged me and a huge smile broke out on her face. ‘You looked so adorable when you said that!’
Then just like that, she kissed me on the cheek. Instantly, small bolts of electricity ran through my body. I felt a tingling sensation running through my fingers and toes. She held me with her hands around my neck. ‘And you always look adorable,’ I said and kissed her back on the forehead. Once. Twice. Thrice. We stared into each other’s eyes, our breathing completely coordinated, heavy and expectant. I knew what was going to happen next, but the voice inside me was screaming aloud, ‘IMPOSSIBLE! YOU’RE A HIDEOUS BOY AND SHE’S AN AMAZING GIRL!’ She looked into my eyes and then lowered them to my lips. Mine followed the same trajectory, inching towards hers until we kissed, softly. She retreated a little and then came closer, looked at me and smiled. This time, she inched forward and kissed me. She tasted very fruity, I guessed from the chewing gum but I didn’t ask. I spent the rest of the evening giggling like a little girl, and I told her about the far-reaching fame of her enviable looks. We talked in hushed tones and kept an eye on her mother who was cooking all this while in the kitchen. Our classes soon went from holding hands, to telling each other about our school and colleges, to talking about our crushes (and she had many!), to stealing kisses whenever we could, and then one day when her mother was visiting my house, we found ourselves considerably naked and wrapped around each other, our legs intertwined in an inseparable and awkward maze. We were exhausted. I don’t think I was very good at making out, but it surely felt unlike anything I have ever felt before. ‘Joy?’ she said, as she looked at me with her wide-open eyes. ‘How many girls have you kissed before me?’ ‘Is that important?’ ‘To me, it is,’ she said, as she looked away and rested her head on my shoulder. ‘Just one. And I didn’t like her as much,’ I said, as I kissed her forehead. ‘Really?’ she looked at me. ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘You are my first guy,’ she said and smiled at me. Her smile, I still maintain, was the best sight in the world. ‘And I wish you to be my last, Joy.’ After that day, we went for three weeks without kissing or holding hands, or even having a proper conversation without someone interrupting us. Her cousins were in Delhi from Bangalore and we always had company, often little baby brothers, irritating as hell and not cute at all. She tried meeting me outside the house a few times but a cousin would always accompany her. It made her restless, it made me lose my mind; I wanted her so bad! A day before they left, Sheeny had texted me that her folks would be at the airport the next day and that I should get protection, and god knows, I read the text about four million times. I intended to text her back the question, WHY?, but I thought it would be pretty stupid; the sentence was self-explanatory and all-encompassing. How I got the protection is a long and embarrassing story in itself, and I should save it for some other time.
I went online and searched forums for Tips & Tricks for first-timers. Everyone seemed to say, just go with the flow, as if that made any sense at all! Listless, I called up Sidharth, who is a bit of know-it-all and the only guy I can discuss this with. Sidharth became kind of like my best friend after Arnab and I fell apart. In fact, he almost became my girlfriend for we talked for hours every day, yakking about girls, careers, professors, his crazy ideologies about life in general, and hung out together, often to the horror of my parents, especially since it was around this time that people started talking about gay rights with alarming frequency. Anyway, Sidharth had always been the go-to guy. Problem-solver. Tall. Good-looking. With the craziest of ideas. Very straightforward. His father worked in the stock market and his cash flows depended on how the stock market behaved each week. ‘You are a lucky bastard!’ Sidharth said. ‘I mean, I have this cousin in the eleventh grade and he is in a band and everything, so you know, he is at the top of the social pyramid. He says that though almost everyone has a girlfriend now, only some of them make out and stuff. And sex is still pretty uncommon. So your girlfriend is a nymphomaniac!’ ‘Fuck off, Sidharth! She’s my girlfriend. Watch it! She is very sweet and I love her!’ I said, defending her; I was uncharacteristically angry. After all, she was my first legitimate girlfriend. ‘Sweet? She asks you to fuck her so soon and she is sweet? Bullshit! She just wants it,’ Sidharth said. ‘She loves me.’ ‘Whatever. I think you should act on it before she changes her mind. You know how girls are, right?’ I realized soon that even Sidharth couldn’t help me out in this matter, and we soon disconnected the call. Despite all my preparations and heavy Googling, we didn’t do it the next time, or the time after that, and the time after that. I wasn’t ready. I just freaked out every time and so did she; this was much more difficult than kissing and bad make-out sessions. We were both not ready. At least, I wasn’t. I felt like a gigantic loser, and I wondered if there was a bigger douchebag than I was. Every time we tried, I would go back home cursing myself, thinking about Sheeny and how I disappointed her, and wondering about how the wearing protection part fits into the whole sex thing. It’s mechanical, unromantic and downright impractical; I think I even started hating the thought of making love. Eventually we stopped talking about it, and things crawled back to normal. It was a Monday, and I don’t know why I remember the day because I am bad at days, but I remember that she had just come out of the shower. Her hair was wet and she looked inviting. The room was redolent with the fragrance of her face wash and her shampoo and her body wash. I was drawn to her, and I kissed her. Twenty minutes later, we were spent. We had done it. Finally. Surprisingly, I felt more relieved than happy (but it was also fantastic!) and I realized I really didn’t hate the thought of making love as much. The hype,
the wait, the anticipation—all of it had lived up to the expectations. The sheer pleasure of having her body next to me, writhing and struggling in pain and ecstasy was unmatchable. Like they say, I will never forget my first time. But, as they say, every rose has its thorn. The pleasure was short-lived. Soon, tension was in the air and it engulfed us. She had bled, but that was the least of our problems. Somewhere in the act, I had heard, and felt a snapping sound, and so had she. But we were so busy moaning out loud, digging our claws into each other and groaning periodically, that we had chosen to ignore it. The sound was of the protection snapping; it had torn. ‘It’s the first time this has happened,’ I said, not wanting any part of the blame on my ignorance. Maybe I had just put it on wrong. ‘We shouldn’t have done it! Damn it!’ ‘Shit. Are you sure … you know?’ she said as the worry lines on her head became prominent; this was nightmarish. I nodded. We immediately started counting dates from her last period. I had read somewhere on the forums about the dates when having sex would be most safe. Anyway, I let her do the counting and she didn’t seem too happy about it. ‘It’s not even one of those fucking safe dates,’ she said and held her head in her hands. She had started crying a little. ‘A girl in Modern School even got pregnant … her parents …’ ‘Nothing like that will happen,’ I said. ‘Let me check on the Internet.’ ‘I will go take a bath,’ she said and rushed to the washroom, wailing. I typed in the Google search bar: Condom burst. What next? Condom Burst. Pregnancy? Pregnancy test. I Googled everything. Emergency Contraceptives. This word stood out. I Googled again. Emergency Contraceptives India Darn! In India, these were still prescription drugs whereas in the US, they were sold over-thecounter. No wonder, India is bursting with people. One condom snaps, and you have a kid in your hands, and your parents disown you and you have to marry the guy! I waited as she took quite some time in the washroom. I pinned my ears to the door and could hear her cry inside. I didn’t know what to say. ‘We need to see a doctor,’ I said, as I tried to stay calm, but I was freaking out. ‘What?’ ‘Pills,’ I said. ‘I am not taking them … They are not good for the body … they do something to your cycles and … Joy, what if Mom … or Dad … I can’t do this …’ she said. She looked tense. She still hadn’t stopped crying, and I wasn’t helping. ‘But we can’t just sit and do nothing. We have to do it!’ I said. ‘It’s easier for you to say. I will ask my friends.’
‘What do they know? I just Googled. It’s all safe. It’s even sold over-the-counter in the US.’ ‘Just leave,’ she said, still crying. ‘But … Let’s at least talk to a doctor …’ ‘Joy. Just leave!’ she shouted. Throughout the next day, I kept calling her and texting her, persuading her to come with me to see a doctor. Time was running out and I was losing my head. Seventy-two hours, I had read on the Internet; there wasn’t much time left. I cursed her for being so irresponsible and thinking only about herself; I called her selfish and reckless. She just cried, listened, disconnected the call and switched off her phone. The following night, after I had gone to sleep, my phone beeped. It was from Sheeny. The message read. Taken the pill. Went with a friend. Don’t worry. Take Care. Women. They are strange, aren’t they? The thought of taking her to a doctor had made me wet my pants, even though I was the guy. She was younger, yet bolder and stronger. This is why such things are always left to women. The more important things in life. Men just aren’t up to the task. At least I wasn’t. I really didn’t know why she wouldn’t go there with me. She did end up taking the pill after all.
‘Maybe she just wanted a little support from you before you started giving her options, Joy. She was looking at you to make her stop crying and not Google and give her options straightaway!’ I said. ‘Why didn’t she just tell me so?’ Joy protested. ‘She was just a kid, Joy. She wanted you to hug her and tell her that it would be okay.’ ‘But I said that!’ ‘You told her to take a pill!’ ‘But that’s what … that would have solved everything,’ he said. All men are the same and Joy was no different. They think only they can come up with solutions, but what they don’t understand is, we don’t want solutions … we want support and care and love. ‘Whatever. But she did love you, didn’t she?’ I asked Joy. Joy paused for a while before he said, ‘Yes, she did.’ ‘Then what happened? Why did you guys break up?’ ‘You have to understand here that I didn’t know what loving someone meant. This was my first real relationship and she was an incredible girl. I didn’t know whether I just wanted to be with her or that I was in love with her … All I knew was that any guy would be in love with a girl like her. I cared about her, but …’
