This was the time that Orkut had first made its presence felt, with its alluring scrapbooks, the communities, and the option to see who visited your profile last; it sounds ancient now, but it was a rage. Everyone had a profile! Within days, I too had a profile up there. I felt confident after my Sarah experience and so I started adding girls to my profile, left, right and centre. Anyone with a good profile picture worked. Things were different back then. Since people were yet to realize that these social networking sites could be hunting grounds for perverts, people accepted random requests if they found the person interesting. Or good-looking. My profile on Orkut was better than most people around, for I had joined the right communities, I put up pictures of the stacks of books I used to read, I tried to be witty in my scrapbook, and I wrote a very sensible ‘About me’; my picture was adequately photoshopped; I had just one good picture where my hair was long and flopped over my forehead, and I had a patch of beard on my skin, somehow it all came together. I looked like an okay-looking, well-read, non-creepy guy from a premier engineering college. A few days later, my mom came up to me and asked if I had put my name on the Internet somewhere. ‘It’s Orkut,’ I said. ‘It’s a social networking site. Friends add each other, we can talk and drop scraps on their walls and tell them we like each other’s pictures.’ It sounded stupid. ‘But all of you have phones!’ she said. ‘I don’t know what you kids are up to these days on the Internet. Anyway, did you add Sheeny?’ I recalled that name in an instant. Sheeny. The neighbourhood sweetheart. If teenage guys were to decide real estate prices, our neighbourhood would be one of the most expensive localities to live in. ‘Yes? Why?’ I asked, nervously. ‘Sheeny told her mom that you study in DCE and they were looking for a Physics teacher, so her mom asked—’ ‘Yes. I will teach her!’ I said, before she could finish her sentence. My mom looked at me strangely, told me that she would tell Sheeny’s mom, and left the room. A week later, I was at Sheeny’s home trying to teach her Electrostatics, and I was having trouble concentrating. She had the most incredible body for a seventeen-year-old; it was cute and cuddly, yet very attractive. At certain levels, she reminded me of Sarah, only Sheeny was fairer, shorter and cuter. A lot cuter. Her dimpled smile and charming demeanour was infectious, her messy brown hair, a thousand shades of brown, looked just perfect on her. I-don’t-care-how-my-hair-looks-like hair.
It was not the first time I was seeing her, but I had never looked at her up close; I could hear my neighbourhood friends shouting and howling outside the window. The word had spread that I was to teach her. ‘Why did you add me?’ she asked as she chewed on her chewing gum. She flicked her hair off her face and looked at me. ‘I remembered you from the community park function,’ I lied. I knew her from long back. Lies had started coming naturally to me. One relationship and you know the ground rules. Lie if you want to live peacefully. ‘I never go to any of those.’ ‘You don’t? I must have, like, found you in one of my friends’ list and recognized you,’ I said and she smiled. ‘Why did you want me to teach you?’ ‘If I don’t get into DCE or a good college through IP University, my parents will take me to Bangalore with them. And I don’t want to go. I have friends here and I don’t want to make new ones. The only good part about Bangalore is the men! They are so tan! I don’t like fair guys, I am a bit of a racist,’ she said, as she sat cross-legged on the bed in her tiny green hot pants and a yellow T-shirt two sizes too big—the transparent bra strap peeked out on her shoulder and it was very distracting. She was a riot of colours, and contrasts. A million shades in her hair, light brown eyes, yellow and green clothes, and the colourless strap. Cute! ‘But why would you want me to teach you?’ ‘You are cute. And you are in DCE! That’s even cooler. My friends will be so jealous,’ she said and winked at me. She clutched tufts of her hair in both hands and pushed them away. Her eyes were beautiful, so brown. ‘Your friends?’ I asked, puzzled. ‘All my friends have boyfriends, and I don’t. And since they don’t know you, I can tell them that I am seeing you!’ she said, as casually as anyone could, still texting on her phone. ‘Seeing me?’ I asked, confused. ‘Oh! I am sorry. I hope it will not be any trouble for you. And they hardly know you. So, it will be fine, I guess …’ she said and placed her hand on mine. Obviously, it was okay. It would have been okay even if she told the whole world about it. It would have been okay even if she told the whole world about it.
‘You are kidding me!’ I exclaimed and interrupted Joy. ‘I had the same reaction,’ Joy said. ‘I asked her again, “Why me?” and she told me that I was cute and tanned! It was hard for me to believe someone could actually like the way I look. It was crazy! I went back home and looked at my reflection in the mirror for hours. I still felt I was ugly as hell!’ ‘And she is so pretty …’ I said and flicked through some more pictures. ‘How come she was single? And how on earth did she find you good-looking? Beats me.’ ‘Yes, it was strange,’ he said. ‘But isn’t it always like that? The extremely pretty girls are always single. Like you,’ he nudged me naughtily. ‘Aww! Asshole,’ I said. ‘Anyway, continue.’ Joy closed the folder and continued with the story, ‘Weeks passed and we were still to do a single question of physics. I had started to really enjoy her company and vice versa. The entire time, I couldn’t tear my eyes off her.’