‘Why can’t guys have multiple orgasms?’ she said and kissed me. ‘And that is exactly why I prefer females in bed—multiple orgasms, sweet smelling hair, smooth skin and beautiful eyes! Aren’t these enough reasons?’ ‘Oh, you just know what to say, not so much as to what you have to do,’ she said and hugged me. This is how she usually taunted me about my inexperience in bed. Since I was her eighth boyfriend and she was only my third girl, she was much more experienced. She was older! What could I have done? ‘It’s not funny when you refer to all the other guys that you have been with,’ I said, not pleased at all; just the mere fact that somebody else had touched her before, would send me into fits of frenzy, and there were eight guys! ‘Whatever I may say, and I hate to say this, but you are by far the best!’ she said. ‘That’s sweet. But then you are a writer. It’s easy for you to say these things!’ I said, though I had really fallen for those words again. ‘Aww baby, that’s just an occupational hazard of dating me,’ she said. ‘But fancy words or not, I mean it. You are awesome,’ she said, rolling me over and nibbling at my ear and giggling. We were at it again, and like always it felt like a million explosions. We lost count of days we had spent lying about idly at her place, reading books together, talking, trying out new recipes together, and spending hours after hours cuddling and watching our favourite shows and movies. She was in between jobs for a few months and it seemed we never got off the bed. We definitely never ever made it out of her apartment. It had become our own little world with books and food and love; it seemed we didn’t need anything else. I had hated the kitchen before, but now I loved serving her horribly burnt food, early in the morning while she purred in her sleep. At least, I made brilliant coffee, and I have to say, she was a bit of an adoring-fan girl! My mother was tired of my frequent night-outs at Sidharth’s place, but she didn’t complain a lot; she thought I was studying hard for my CAT exams. One day while we were cuddling and had buried ourselves in each other’s arms, we heard footsteps in the main hall; it seemed like I had forgotten to bolt the main door again. ‘Hey! Man! You guys disgust me. Fuck. This room stinks!’ Sidharth said, as he entered through the door. ‘Sidharth! Would it break your knuckles to knock before you enter?’ Manika exclaimed as she pulled the blanket over herself. ‘You’re HORRIBLE!’ ‘No, but it would surely not give me a chance to see you naked,’ he chuckled. ‘Fuck you, Sidharth,’ I said.
‘Oh shut up. I would rather do it with her,’ he chuckled. ‘Whatever,’ I said. ‘And why don’t you guys pick up the phone, damn it! I have been calling all morning. I wanted to tell you guys something, but you just can’t seem to keep your hands free! Perverts!’ ‘Look who’s talking! We are trying to avoid you, asshole,’ she muttered. ‘Is that too hard to understand?’ ‘Back to you, unemployed journalist and failed writer and the one who snatched my best friend away from me!’ he retorted. ‘Don’t say that, Sidharth,’ I said and hugged her. ‘Her book is going pretty well, trust me!’ ‘Yeah, yeah. I know all about the never-ending book, which has you as the main character. Call me when she manages to finish it within this century!’ ‘You told him about the book?’ Manika asked me. She had asked me not to tell anyone until she finished it; she said it would jinx it. ‘You are all he talks about, Manika. I don’t remember the last time he talked about anything else. I just want to know what spells you have put on my innocent friend. I always knew you were bad for him!’ he said and smirked. ‘As if you talk about anything other than your stupid projects,’ I defended. ‘Shut up, you two,’ Manika said. ‘Stop fighting like a married couple. Get a life!’ ‘I have a life. It’s you,’ I said and kissed Manika. ‘That’s so gay and so gross. Anyway,’ Sidharth said, ‘I have to tell you guys something really serious.’ ‘For a change,’ Manika smirked. ‘Whatever. The thing is that I have taken a transfer. I got the scholarship! So I will do the next three semesters, and maybe even my Master’s, in the most romantic city in the world, PARIS!’ he said and threw his arms wide open, grinning widely. ‘What?’ I said, staring in disbelief. ‘THAT’S AWESOME! Really? Come here!’ We hugged and jumped and I congratulated him repeatedly. I was so freaking happy for him. Out of all the geeks and the nerds that infested our college, one of us won the scholarship. My best buddy! I felt like I had done it, like I was going to France, not him. For all the times we were thrown out of class, this was the sweetest revenge. ‘So when do you leave?’ Manika asked. ‘I am leaving this coming Monday,’ he said, his voice now solemn. … And that’s when we realized the gravity of the situation; it struck us that he could be gone for a year, maybe more. Yes, at a certain level, I was extremely happy about him because he had always wanted to go there and study for a while, travel a little, and do all sorts of crazy stuff that only he did, and get some respect back, but we never thought he would actually make it. Even when he was working night and day for this scholarship, we thought a moment would come when he would give it all up and join us. But he didn’t. Manika told me a few times that he would really see it through, and I felt guilty, because
even I, his best friend, really didn’t believe he had it in him to go through with it. Eventually, I was so glad he actually did it. We never thought he would really go! And now that he was going, it just sucked balls. The moment he said it, it felt like he had always been around and now, suddenly, he just wouldn’t be there to get me into trouble as he always did. Sidharth would never be a part of our plans. Manika and I had gotten Manika’s sister interested in Sidharth and we had decided to set her up with him. We had imagined the four of us together! ‘But then again, long-distance relationships do work sometimes,’ Manika said out loud, trying to lighten up the mood. ‘You two will still stick it out. There is too much love to be lost,’ she winked. ‘I will ignore the homosexual jibe you just took, Manika. But I am going to miss you guys. Yes, Manika, I will miss you too. IMAGINE,’ he sighed. ‘I never thought I would be saying this, and it pains me to say this, but I will miss you too,’ Manika replied. ‘Especially since you were such a central character in the book! Now who will be Joy’s best friend in the book?’ ‘Shut up,’ he said. ‘I will still be the best friend. I will always be. And if you don’t remember, let me remind you that you wouldn’t be naked next to him if it wasn’t for me and that rave I dragged him to.’ Sidharth was going away. It was almost like a break-up, just that he was a guy with hairy legs and a little paunch, but I loved him. ‘Sidharth?’ Manika said. ‘You know what? None of us believed that you would actually make it. Not him. Not me. So now that you have, you deserve a big party from us.’ ‘You really thought I couldn’t do it?’ he asked in all seriousness. ‘Nope,’ we echoed. ‘Heck—even I thought I couldn’t do it!’ That night, we had a big party for him. We didn’t invite very many people, but there was a lot of booze, and then, there was us. We didn’t need anyone else. We drank (I had started drinking occasionally), ate and cried together, and we promised each other that we would remain the best of friends no matter how many miles separated us. Then, one by one, everyone puked, passed out and slept, leaving just Sidharth and me awake and in our senses. ‘So, Paris, eh?’ I said. ‘French girls in short summer dresses, depressing winters, and lots of wine. I am really happy for you.’ ‘Thank you,’ he said, wistfully. ‘And what did your parents say about it?’ ‘They are pretty happy. They never thought I could do something like this. But it’s somewhat sad that I have to go now. I mean, it’s Delhi. I never imagined myself anywhere else. The roads, the girls, the food, nothing will ever match up to this …’ ‘Fuck off. I am sure you can’t wait to land there with all those firang chicks all around.’
He laughed. ‘Yeah, that’s something I am looking forward to, but it wouldn’t be fun without you.’ ‘Bastard.’ ‘You shouldn’t be jealous, Joy. You have Manika. And you are great together. Generally people say this to a girl, but I am going to say this to you, because we know how weak-ass you are—I hope she doesn’t break your heart.’ ‘Thank you.’ ‘I am seriously happy for you guys. You look so complete with your books and your favourite authors and your old movies. Remember when I was with Vani? I thought that was it, but then I see you guys and I say to myself every day … that this is it. I would kill for where you are,’ he said. ‘I always knew you had the hots for my girlfriend!’ I joked. ‘Not funny. But stick with her. You are great with her.’ ‘I intend to go nowhere else,’ I said. We talked for a little while, drank a little more and drifted off to sleep. Anyway, time took its course and the day of his departure to France came and went. For a month at least thereafter, I would be sad because there was nobody to do guy stuff with, but then again, I had Manika to take care of me. So everything went back to being just fine; I learned to live without him. Though, to date, it’s never been more than two days that Sidharth and I haven’t talked, and that was good enough. From the moment Sidharth left, my relationship started getting serious with every passing minute, and I kept asking myself questions as to whether I should take the next step or not. To me, I had no doubt in my mind that I would see this relationship to its very end. I love you, what can possibly go wrong?, I always told her. ‘Joy?’ Manika said. ‘Do you think we can last?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘You mean, in the long run, you and me?’ she asked again, as she laid her head on my shoulder. The question was meaningless for I was sure about her; for the last few months, she was all I needed and pined for. I was there when she left for office; I was there when she came back after office, when she woke up with her hair in tangles, when she went to sleep in the Winnie-the-Pooh imprinted pyjamas, on her good days, on her bad days—we were together 24/7! We were pretty much living together. I saw no reason why I wouldn’t be able to do the same for the next many lives, together. ‘I am sure about it, Manika. You are all I need, it’s like you are everything I wanted in a girl. I can’t be happier. I have seen how complete I am with you. I just don’t want to be without you now. I can’t be.’ ‘That’s so sweet. But tell me, just hypothetically, if you wake up someday and I am not there, I am just not there, what would you feel like?’ she asked in all earnest, and my eyes welled up almost instantly, and I wanted to run away from the question and the possibility.
It was not an option. ‘I will do anything just to get to you. Anything.’ ‘What if I die?’ she asked and I saw tears sprouting in the corner of her eyes too. ‘I will follow you,’ I said, and she hugged me. I felt her tears wet my shirt. We were together. We were always meant to be. I had chosen her. For life.
‘Awww, that’s so sweet,’ I said and hugged him. He looked so sweet when he repeated the dialogues he had said. And really, I had never imagined him like this; I had always seen him as a heartless bastard. So, I told him, ‘It’s almost unbelievable that you can talk like that. It’s unreal. Which girl wouldn’t love it?’ ‘Thank you, Neeti. But then, it really was effortless with her, it wasn’t as if I was trying to be sweet. I didn’t have to think before speaking back then. No pretences. No lies. I just poured out whatever I felt like and she liked it that way,’ he said, ever so cutely. Awww, I just wanted to cuddle him so bad. It was actually a shock for me to see him lovelorn, an absolute romantic. ‘So, what next?’ I said. ‘When did you two write the book? The first one?’ ‘Hmmm, actually she wrote it. Almost all of it, and it was early in the fourth year of my engineering that she completed the book. So if you don’t like the book, you have to blame Manika and not me.’ ‘When did it get released?’ ‘After it got accepted, it took a few months to come out in the market. I read the manuscript on our first anniversary. I had read it in parts but she hadn’t let me read the whole thing,’ Joy said. ‘And that’s another story.’ ‘Tell me,’ I said and Joy continued.