22nd December , 2009 It’s a myth that people and relationships don’t change. In fact, both keep evolving with the passage of time. As time passes us by, we go through so much that we grow into a different person altogether and thus the nature of our relationship changes. In the past few months, Rohan had witnessed things that he had never experienced before in his life. Some people told him not to let go of what he couldn’t live without, but actually it was holding on to that thing that was tearing him apart. He had understood and accepted that Zoya couldn’t be part of his life anymore. He deleted all her messages and didn’t keep any contact with her. Neither did she. Time and again, her words would reverberate in his ears: Someone, somewhere is happy knowing that you are happy. He didn’t hate her, but he had lost all the reasons to love her. Sometimes you love, learn, and then move on, which is perfectly fine as not everything is meant to last forever. Post their break-up, he had begun to spend more and more time with Riddhima. She was his pillar of strength who helped him move on and he loved being with her. However, she was still just a friend and his French teacher, nothing more. Every minute you spend with someone you aren’t meant to be with, takes away the time you could have instead spent with the right person you should have been with in the first place. For her, Rohan was that right person. He too had slowly developed feelings for her but was afraid of taking things to the next level. Virat supported Rohan post his break-up, explaining to him why it was important to move on in life and not pay heed to what had happened. His funda in life was ‘let bygones be bygones’. He tried to make Rohan see what a wonderful girl Riddhima was. He firmly believed that Rohan won’t ever find another girl like her, someone who stood by him, selflessly, during his ups and downs even when he was in a relationship with Zoya. He told him to take a chance with Riddhima and figure out if she was really the one for him. He didn’t want Rohan to regret not having tried his luck with her.
‘Where are you? I’m waiting near the canteen,’ Kavya told Virat over the phone. ‘I am at the gate. See you in 5 minutes.’ Even though Virat was now dating Mahek, nothing changed between Kavya and him. They still were the best of friends who would do stupid things together, be it teasing, irritating, or insulting each other. The fact is you’re not really best friends until you start insulting each other on a daily basis. Virat was someone who would do anything for a good friend and Kavya was on top of that friend list. Whenever she was in a fix, Virat would come to her rescue, leaving everything behind. After he parked his car, Virat sent a text message to Mehak as he walked towards the canteen. Waiting for you in the canteen. Come soon. I want to feel you touch. Love you. Muaah. Mehak’s reply soon followed: I want to feel not only your touch but much more. Waiting to see you. Love you more. A girl can be your best friend, your lover, your worst enemy, or your worst nightmare. It all depends on how you treat her. Virat pampered both the girls who were special to him in their own, unique way. Mahek never tried to keep Virat away from Kavya; she never felt insecure. She had full faith in Virat and their love which grew stronger with each passing day. She had kept her relationship a secret from her family because she didn’t want any unnecessary complications. Involving the family would mean having restrictions on going out late with her friends and she didn’t want to lose that freedom. Moreover, her family was the conservative kind and wouldn’t have accepted Virat so easily knowing that he had lost his parents early on in life and didn’t have a career yet. ‘Where is Mahek?’ Kavya asked as soon as Virat reached the canteen. ‘She must be reaching anytime now. I have informed her that we are here.’ ‘Let’s order something while we wait for her. I’m famished.’ As Virat was ordering something at the counter, Mehak surprised him from behind by hugging him. For a few seconds they forgot that they were in canteen and not in their bedroom, but it hardly bothered them. Virat turned and pecked her on the cheek. He ordered Misal-Pav for her as it was her favourite dish. Back at the table, all three of them gossiped about how bad their college was and how their professors acted like psychos. No matter how reputed our colleges are, we love to curse it and even if it has the best teaching staff, we love to abuse our professors. ‘You should see our Organizational Behaviour professor peep into the classroom when he notices a female professor teaching. His speed slows down automatically, and he scans them from top to bottom,’ Kavya said. ‘We should make his MMS too. What say?’ Mehak added. ‘Oh please, I don’t want to get thrown out of college,’ Virat said sarcastically.
‘Anyway, we never actually attend classes, do we? We just eat at here at the canteen or roam about in the campus,’ Kavya laughed and everyone joined in. While they were talking, Virat felt a hand lingering on his inner thighs, under the table. He froze for a moment and looked around to scan the room and see if anyone was noticing them. ‘Ouch!’ Virat screamed. ‘What happened to you? Why did you scream?’ Kavya asked, unaware of what was happening. ‘Nothing. I am absolutely fine.’ Mehak laughed and continued to pinch his thighs. Virat reciprocated by grazing the sole of his feet against her thigh. They continued teasing each other like this for some time until Mahek sent him a message. I want to be alone with you. Let’s go to some classroom. Virat replied saying, ‘What if someone enters the classroom? We will be fucked.’ Mehak gave him an irritated look and replied: You always act dumb. We will ask Kavya to stand outside the classroom and keep a watch. Virat looked at her in a state of shock. But the more he thought about it, the more exciting the idea seemed. After all, Kavya was their friend who knew everything about them. And they didn’t have to disclose everything to her. They could simply say they needed the privacy of the classroom to discuss something important. Looking at her seductive eyes, he felt a sudden urge to devour her against the hard, cold wall of the classroom. He asked both girls to follow him. ‘Where to?’ Kavya questioned. ‘I’ll tell you. Let’s leave from here first.’ Kavya and Mehak followed Virat as he left the canteen. Virat turned and looked at Mahek who was still smiling. Kavya again asked where they were going in curiosity. ‘Kavya, there’s something important we wanna discuss and we need your help in that,’ Virat hushed. Mahek was walking behind them and couldn’t stop her laughter, but whenever Kavya turned, she changed her expression to one of seriousness. ‘Actually, Mehak and I had a big fight yesterday and want to sort things out. So we want to be left alone in some classroom for some time to talk things out…’ Before he could continue, Kavya interrupted him, ‘Why alone in the classroom?’
‘Where else should we go? Should we create a scene in front of everyone? You know very well that a girl in a bad mood is the most dangerous creature on this planet. So I need some protection,’ Virat added. When he further told her that she had to wait outside and keep a check, Kavya almost killed Virat. ‘Now, you want me to be your security guard? So mean. Mehak, look, your boyfriend is really mean. Let’s look for someone better for you. Someone really hot and not mean like him.’ ‘What the fuck, you…’ he shouted but paused realizing that an argument with Kavya would prolong the act. Eventually, Kavya agreed and they entered an empty first-floor classroom. Virat promised Kavya that he would buy her a drink or two for helping them out. Kavya hit him hard on his back and gave him an angry look. Virat gave her a flying kiss and told her to lock the door from outside so no passersby could suspect anything. Kavya stood outside the door in the passage pretending that she was waiting for someone. ‘More than anything else, I am afraid of Kavya opening the door,’ Virat said as he pulled Mahek closer. Mahek smiled and pulled his cheeks lovingly. Virat pushed her against the wall and leaned in to give her a kiss She shyly turned her face away. Virat proceeded to kiss her neck, then her ears, then eyes. She felt a wild sensation running through her body. Getting intimate in a public place further added to the pleasure. They were nervous but equally thrilled, afraid that they’d hear a knock. Virat rolled his fingers inside her t-shirt and kissed her passionately. She returned his kisses with equal fervor. Once done cuddling, they sat on the bench and Mahek opened her lunch box. She had cooked green pea rice along with some yoghurt especially for Virat. In fact, one of the reasons why she wanted to be alone with him was to make him eat with her own hands. When your heart starts to function, your brain begins to malfunction. ‘Why do you love me so much?’ Virat asked. ‘I don’t know, but I can’t live without you. I feel safe with you,’ Mehak replied, feeding him the rice. ‘I am so lucky to have you. You’re not my life, you’re the one I want to spend it with. You’re not my world, you’re the best thing in it,’ Virat added. Once done eating the lunch, he gave her a peck on the cheek as a ‘thank you’ gesture. ‘That’s it? That’s all I get for cooking you such yummy food?’ The spark in Mahek’s eyes and her seductive looks made him horny. He grabbed her by the waist and made her lie down on the bench. He saw the nervousness in her eyes and kissed her forehead. ‘I just want to look at every inch of your body,’ Virat said as he stood up. He couldn’t control himself anymore and pounced on her like a wild beast. He started kissing her wildly, like there was no tomorrow. Lost in the ecstasy of passionate love, he
bit her slightly hard on the neck and she screamed loudly in response. Virat looked at her for a second and gave her a small peck where he bit her. Mahek wrapped her hands around him and kissed his neck. As Virat’s hands tried to explore her body, pulling her top up, they heard their door being opened. They immediately got up and tried to pretend like nothing had happened, but to their dismay, Kavya had seen more than she had bargained for. She broke into laughter looking at them. Virat looked at her, embarrassed, while Mahek was still pulling down her t-shirt. ‘Fuck, this is hilarious. I should have hung the “Do not disturb” sign outside,’ she laughed till the point her stomach pained. ‘Kavya, you should have knocked first. Shit man, you made my heart jump,’ said Virat almost getting a heart attack. ‘You think I didn’t know what you guys were doing inside? You both are dumb. The moment you started texting each other in the canteen, I knew that you wanted to board a railgaadi.’ ‘What railgaadi?’ Mahek asked with a puzzled look. ‘Sex, foreplay…whatever you’d like to call it,’ she winked. Mahek turned red in embarrassment. Kavya screamed when Virat pulled her ears as if he was punishing a kid. Virat felt like a batsman who is run out, and right when he thinks his time is up, the umpire declares it a ‘no ball’, much to the relief of the batsman. Kavya told them that she didn’t open the door for fun but because she saw the head of their department on his daily rounds. All of them immediately left the classroom. As they walked out, they glanced at each other and burst into laughter at what had just happened. There is no feeling more comforting and consoling than knowing that you are in the company of the one you love. Rare are such relationships where you hold no grudges, no complaints, and no insecurities.
‘How about going to your place for some fun rather than going for a movie?’ Mahek asked. Virat had dropped Kavya home and was heading for a movie with Mehak. While on their way to the movie hall, Mehak suggested they go his place instead. As soon as Mehak mentioned going to his home for fun, a picture of a chemist shop flashed in his mind. He immediately turned his car around and gave a wicked smile to Mahek. He stopped the car near a chemist shop he had never been to before. He did this deliberately so he won’t feel awkward while asking for a condom. Another reason why he preferred going to an unknown chemist was that he had never purchased a condom before in his life. It was his first time and he felt uneasy asking for it at the counter. He couldn’t express his uneasiness to Mahek because she would’ve made fun of him, hurting his
male ego. Though he was aware of the brands and the flavours because of the advertisements, when his time came, he didn’t know which one to order. Maybe I should have asked Mahek, he thought. After all, she is the one who will have to…Brushing aside his thoughts, he mustered courage and walked towards the counter. There were a couple of customers at the counter and he waited till the salesperson cleared their bills. ‘Yes, what do you want?’ one of the guys at the counter asked Virat. ‘You can clear their bills first. I’m in no hurry. I’ll just speak with my friend till then,’ he said pretending to call someone. He looked out the glass door and saw Mahek looking back at him in anticipation. He signalled saying he’d be back in 2 minutes, pretending to be on a call with someone. The truth was, he had called customer care instead, as he was fucking nervous to take a step forward. He had never felt such tension before, not even during his exams. Now he understood why people called ‘love-making’ an art. ‘Son, what do you need?’ the counter guy asked Virat once again. ‘I need…give me one…Crocin and D-cold,’ Virat said feeling the tension build up in his body. Shit, man. Come on Virat, you can do it. You have to do it. You are a man, he told himself. Suddenly, the person standing next to him asked for a Moods condom packet. ‘Give me one, too. Also, add a 5-star to my bill. How much, uncle?’ Just to cover up for the condoms, he had asked for a 5-star chocolate as well. The guy at the counter understood the reason behind Virat’s uneasiness and gave him a comforting smile. Finally, the first battle had been won! Virat left the counter after paying the bill. He opened the door to the car and gave Mahek a wide smile. Making love is not just about sex, it’s a battle of hormones that starts from asking a condom at the chemist shop. ‘Got it?’ Mahek asked. ‘Yeah, It was easy. I was just receiving an important call so it took some time. Take this—this is for you, my darling,’ Virat proudly declared, giving her both the condom and the 5-star he had bought to save him some humiliation. She gave him a kiss on the cheek and they left for his home. Virat parked the car, lifted her up in his arms, and carried her inside the house As soon as Virat closed the door, Mehak embraced him lovingly. She buried her face in his shoulder while he wrapped an arm around her, returning the hug. He pulled her back to him as she tried to escape and smooched her hungrily. She finally pulled away from him and ran towards the kitchen. He ran after her, wrapping his arms around her waist and lifting her up in the air. When he placed her back on the ground, she turned to look at him amusingly. ‘Go take a shower first,’ she teased and escaped from his grip, leaving Virat disappointed. He went to freshen up and asked her to make herself comfortable.
While Virat took a bath, Mahek removed a note from her bag, knowing that Virat would head straight for his wardrobe once he was out of the bathroom. She kept the note on top of his clothes and quickly changed into her shorts without taking her heels off. Virat got out of the shower with nothing but a towel wrapped around his waist. His bare body looked very seductive, with water dripping all over his chest. She gazed at him in admiration. Virat was about to pick up tee from the wardrobe when he saw the note. He picked the note up. It said, Fill in the blanks: I’m lusting for your ____. I want you to lick my ____ and ____ over and over again. I even want to feel your ____ in my ____. Virat looked at Mahek and said, ‘So this was all your planning, eh?’ Mahek bit her lip seductively and said, ‘Are you just going to stand there lusting for me or are you going to do something about it?’ She was speaking in such a sexy tone that he couldn’t resist pouncing on her. She let out a moan and in a few seconds, he grabbed her and pushed her on the bed. She licked his fingers one by one and then traced the outline of his lips. It made his body tingle. ‘If you could picture what’s going through my mind right now, you’d be totally, and I mean totally, turned on,’ he whispered in her ears. ‘What’s that?’ she asked while encircling his nipples with her fingernails. The room had been dimly lit, creating a passionate ambience for lovemaking. Virat removed the deck of cards from the drawer. ‘Let’s play a game,’ Virat declared. ‘These are a pack of playing cards. We assign a sexual act to each suit symbol like kisses for diamonds, body rub for spades, rolling of fingers for heart, and trying out a new position for clubs. Each number represents the wildness of the act. The higher the number, the wilder you’ll have to be.’ ‘I am up for it,’ Mahek responded. She picked the first card up and it was an 8 of diamonds which meant kisses. The next moment, she leaned over him and started kissing him all over his body. From neck till toe, she kissed him 7 times, and gave him a final passionate kiss on his lips. Virat picked the next card and it was a 10 of hearts. He slowly undressed her, first removing her shorts and then the t-shirt. She still had her heels on and Virat was about to remove that too, but she told him not to. ‘I want to make out wearing just my heels. Doesn’t it turn you on?’ she asked. Virat nodded and slowly started rolling his fingers all over her, starting from her neck onwards. He paused near her belly and kissed it, making her moan loudly. The game continued for some time till Mehak grabbed the hem of his boxers and pulled down. She rolled her necklace on his body in such a manner that it aroused his senses. She stopped rolling near his inner thighs and looked above. Virat’s eyes were shut.
‘Look at me while you make love to me. Look here Virat. Look me in the eyes,’ she moaned. He gave her a sexy smile as he came up and hugged her. It was all happening too quickly. Virat took charge and Mehak screamed loudly. She wrapped her legs around his waist and Virat penetrated her slowly. ‘Virat,’ she whispered stroking his hair. ‘You put something in the food. Didn’t you?’ she said with a satisfaction on her face. ‘Hmm,’ he giggled. ‘And Virat…’ ‘Hmm?’ ‘This was indeed amazing,’ she panted, curling up on his sweaty chest. Mehak kissed him. Virat responded with the same excitement and they hugged each other. ‘You know what?’ Virat said as he stroked her hair. Mehak looked into his eyes and slowly kissed his cheeks like a small baby. ‘Shit, we forgot to use the condom,’ Virat said, remembering the lengths he had gone to buy them. ‘It’s ok. We are safe. You pulled out at the right time,’ she replied. ‘It’s not about safety. It was about my effort. Leave it, you will never understand,’ Virat said sadly. Only he knew what all he had done to get that Moods packet but in the end everything happened so quickly that Mahek was not in a mood to even wait for a second. Neither was Virat. Virat played their song on his mobile and hugged her, Dil ke chaman ka hasna toh dekho, Jaage nazar ka sapna toh dekho. Aise hue hum, ek jaan ek dil, Tu hai ki me hu, kehna hai mushkil… Zhoka basanti hai tu…tan hai gulaabi mera!! Do rang milne ke baad, hote nahi hai judaa… Saathiya tune kya kiya…itna karo na mujhe pyaar!! Virat and Mehak were lost in each other’s arms, with not a care in the world.
The next morning, Mehak woke up content in Virat’s arms. She saw the time and woke up Virat as it was getting late. They got ready and Virat decided to drop Mahek home. Before leaving the house, they kissed each other one more time before locking the door. Virat took his bike instead of the car to avoid the morning traffic. He dropped her outside her home in Aundh. On his way back, he saw Rohan smoking near a paanwala.
He immediately stopped his bike and greeted him. He was delighted to see him and puzzled as well ‘How come you are here in Aundh?’ Virat asked. ‘I had come to meet my aunt who stays here. I was just on my way back home. What about you?’ ‘Pick and drop service for my girlfriend, you see,’ Virat winked. Rohan laughed and offered a cigarette to Virat. Virat helped himself to one ciggie and asked him whether he had moved on. Rohan nodded affirmatively. He confessed that he was confused about certain decisions in life and wanted to discuss them with Virat at length just to ease his stress. ‘Can we meet on Sunday?’ Rohan asked, looking at the calendar on his mobile phone. ‘Yes. Why not? Anything serious?’ ‘Kind of. Even my brother Aditya would like to join us, if that’s okay with you,’ Rohan said. ‘C’mon buddy, I am completely okay with it.’ They bid goodbye to each other and went their separate ways. We often meet people unintentionally in our lives without knowing that they would become our well-wishers some day. Rohan never thought that he would share his worries with someone he had met only a couple of times. Plus he never expected Virat to support and guide him through the rough patches in his life. It’s not about how long you’ve know each other or how often you meet. If your wavelength matches, then one meeting is all it takes.