Mid July, 2009 ‘Kavya, what are you doing here at this hour? You act like my mom. She also had this habit of waking me up early in the morning for no reason whatsoever. It’s so annoying!’ Virat muttered still half-asleep. Kavya was kicking his butt in an attempt to wake him up. Virat and Kavya were both students at Biosis College, Pune. I wanna make up right now, na na…wish we never broke up right now, na na… The song was playing on repeat on the stereo and Virat slept without a care in the world. Kavya kept a duplicate key of his room with her precisely for situations like these. If it were up to Virat, he would sleep all through the day. ‘You can never get up on your own, can you? You should throw away your alarm clock. It’s of no use,’ Kavya complained shaking him up. Kavya was a tomboy, completely extrovert in nature. She made friends easily unlike Virat and loved playing sports and riding a bike. Although slightly plump, she carried herself with grace and was always full of energy. She never wore anything that would make her look like a slut. She was a hardcore foodie at heart and loved to experiment with her taste buds. Her favourite hobby was teasing boys and she didn’t spare Virat whenever she got a chance. Kavya stayed in Kothrud, Pune. She was extremely bold and forthright, and did not care if people took her the wrong way. ‘How can you kick me in my own house?’ Virat looked annoyingly at Kavya with his eyes half open. ‘Oh please! This is not your house. This wouldn’t even classify as a “house”. Look at that dirty underwear of yours hanging on the rope. It’s so old it’s covered in holes! And those socks of yours? They stink so bad that I need to carry a room freshener with me every time I come to your house,’ Kavya said with an expression of disgust on her face. He barely made note of her complaints and went back to sleep, asking her not to disturb him for another 15 minutes. Virat was a smart and witty boy, with an extremely good sense of humour. His only vice was that he was extremely lazy. Kavya would try her best to talk him out of sleeping
so late, but he wouldn’t listen. He always wore a stubble on his fair skinned face and the style helped him woo girls. Like Kavya, he would never bother himself with what people thought about him and was never ashamed to express what he felt. Though he would take his time to befriend people, he was never outrightly rude to anyone. He feared getting into a serious relationship as the early demise of his parents had scarred him forever. He knew how to charm everyone in his presence and could talk to anyone with ease. He stayed with his aunt in Mumbai during his school days and later, when he started going to Boisis College to study Commerce, he took up a flat on rent near his college. He met Kavya in the same college and they hit it off instantly. She tolerated him and adored him while he had her back, always. All the other girls? Well, they were friends. Friends with ‘benefits’. ‘Get up, you kumbhkaran. Look at how late it is. I hope you remember we were supposed to go shopping today,’ Kavya said and went into the kitchen to prepare breakfast. By the time she entered the bedroom, Virat had taken a bath and was getting ready. ‘That is so sweet of you. That’s why I call you my best friend,’ she said pulling his cheeks. ‘Stop sugarcoating me. I said I’ll come and I always live up to my promise. So let’s go,’ he said adjusting the collar of his t-shirt. ‘Wear your pants, at least,’ Kavya said pointing to the towel wrapped around his waist. ‘Stop instructing me on the proper dress code when you aren’t dressed in salwar kameez either,’ he laughed looking at the skirt she was wearing. ‘Who do you think you are, a stud?’ Kavya asked. Virat ignored the question and grabbed a comb from the dressing table, eating his breakfast simultaneously. This annoyed Kavya. To set him straight, Kavya knew just what to do. Virat had a few oversized shirts in his wardrobe that he had never worn before. ‘What are you doing?’ Virat asked her when she picked up one of the oversized shirts and went to the washroom to change. ‘You’ll see in a minute,’ Kavya replied cheekily as she closed the door of the bathroom. What excited Kavya was a nightmare to Virat. When she came out, she was wearing nothing but an XXL size shirt with a waist belt. The shirt barely covered her thighs. ‘Have you lost your mind?’ he screamed. ‘If you can wear those tiny boxers of yours and roam around freely in the house, why can’t I go out shopping like this? Doesn’t it look sexy?’ Kavya asked checking herself out in the mirror.
‘I am not coming with you if you are going out wearing that. Tell me, you are kidding, right?’ Virat was completely baffled. ‘Don’t you dare challenge me. If you lose, tonight’s drinks are on you.’ Saying so, Kavya pulled Virat by the hand and took him downstairs. She refused to go via his car and ignited her scooty. Virat was completely embarrassed. He looked around to see if anyone was watching them. Kavya was enjoying Virat’s embarrassment and couldn’t control her laughter. While driving, Kavya’s shirt would slide up a bit, and Virat would try and pull it down for her, much to Kavya’s amusement. Whenever the scooty would halt due to heavy traffic, they would become the centre of attraction as all eyes would be fixed on them. All Virat could do was hide his face under the helmet. ‘Kavya, this is not done. Can’t we just go back to our room?’ Virat pleaded. Kavya was in no mood to listen and continued to drive until they reached SGS mall on MG Road. Even the person who handled their parking ticket in the mall took his own time to check out Kavya. ‘You son of a bitch…’ Virat was unable to control his anger but calmed down when Kavya pinched his thigh. He had never witnessed such an embarrassing situation before in his entire life and decided not to wear his tiny boxers, not even at home. Theirs was a crazy relationship where nothing was off limits. ‘It’s not over yet. We still have to go shopping inside the mall,’ Kavya winked at Virat. Virat had no other option than to comply with her wishes. From the security guards to each and every person in SGS mall, everyone stared at them, probably because she looked weird to them or because they wondered why Virat was on the verge of crying even when he was with a sexy-looking girl. Kavya was enjoying herself to the fullest. She was happy that she had won the bet and that Virat would now have to foot the bill. They shopped for her and unsurprisingly, Virat took a keen interest in selecting her outfit so she couldn’t humiliate him again. ‘Are you enjoying, darling?’ Kavya said pulling his cheeks as they stood by the billing counter of Westside. ‘I will respond suitably when the odds are in my favour,’ he replied as Kavya smiled looking at him. They left the mall and rushed back to Virat’s apartment. This was not the first time that Kavya had messed around with him. She could do so repeatedly because they shared such a strong bond with each other. Isn’t this what true friendship is all about? Doing all those crazy things that you can’t do with anyone else? Once they entered his flat, Virat and Kavya burst into laughter. They were completely crazy and loved being with each other. Virat and Kavya’s connection was above time and space.
‘Kavya, tell me something…didn’t you feel awkward this morning when you went out in that outfit?’ Virat asked. ‘I did feel awkward, but that’s fine. Paagalpanti is the trademark of our relationship. Moreover, I could only do so because you were there with me in your boxers,’ Kavya winked. They were both enjoying drinks at the Swig lounge in Koregaon Park. Virat had lost a challenge he had never accepted in the first place. But you can’t win an argument with girls, can you? Swig was one of the coolest places in Pune where you could just lose yourself in the crowd. With an amazing ambience in the evening, the place was an attraction to youngsters and the college-going crowd of the city. It had a prominent bar right at the centre, with wooden tables and chairs, and beautiful stained glass lamps that hung above each table, creating an ambiance of warmth. Virat and Kavya loved coming to this place, especially on Tuesdays when most drinks were served at discounted prices during ‘Happy Hours’. ‘Cheers!’ Virat said raising a toast to their friendship. It was his fourth glass of the evening. ‘Tell me seriously, who was that girl you were talking to yesterday? I’ve never seen you with her before,’ Kavya said giving him an odd look. ‘Are you talking about the girl who was wearing a blue dress?’ he asked trying to recall. ‘Oh, so you even remember the colour of her dress! You were getting so close with her that I thought…you know…’ ‘Oh, shut up. I spoke to her for the first time yesterday. I had my reasons. Her name is Mahek. And anyway, I have decided to be serious now. I mean not with her but…you know…I want to be in a committed relationship now. No hanky panky,’ Virat stammered. ‘Oh really? Is it you talking or the bottle?’ Kavya laughed. ‘I am serious, Kavya. I was talking to her to confirm whether she would be joining Salsa classes or not.’ ‘Ok, so then?’ ‘Then what? She is joining. She is an expert at dance and you know how pathetic I am. So I thought maybe she could teach me?’ Kavya couldn’t stop laughing at the thought of Virat and Mehak as dance partners. She didn’t know if she was imagining things due to the effect of alcohol or was Virat seriously in love. Virat had never been serious about a relationship before although he had dated many girls in the past. So it was quite strange for Kavya to hear from Virat that he was actually getting serious about love. The only serious relationship he had was with Kavya. But it was pure friendship. She decided to ignore his ramblings till he
sobered up. She was a bit high as well and decided to leave the matter be. Generally, friends get serious about something or someone in a drunken state. Virat was no different. She called for the waiter. ‘Can I get you anything, ma’am?’ the waiter asked politely. ‘Ma’am my foot. Tell me, are you giving birth to the chicken? It’s been more than an hour since we ordered the dish. Where is it?’ The waiter immediately left to enquire the reason for the delay while Virat kept staring at Kavya after her sudden outburst. The waiter brought out the dish the very next moment and Virat was about to ask for the bill when Kavya shouted again, ‘Manager, see the oldie there. Oh god, I think he’s dead.’ A middle-aged guy in his mid-30s was sitting adjacent to them and was resting his head on the table after having a drink too much. Kavya thought of annoying the guy and continued, ‘Manager, I am serious. See this old uncle here? He’s dead.’ Virat was used to her antics, especially when she was drunk. They laughed as the people sitting around them started looking at them as if they had come from a different planet altogether. After sometime, when the situation was under control and that oldie had left the place, she insisted they leave the lounge without paying the bill. Virat didn’t agree in the beginning but then thought of trying it for the thrill. They tried to act casual so that the waiters didn’t catch their attention. ‘I am going to quietly move out by pretending to be on a call. Once I leave, you can join me in a couple of minutes. You can even come later as they don’t really question girls.’ Saying so, Virat moved outside pretending that he was not getting network coverage in the room and slowly walked towards his bike. When he saw no one was noticing him, he sat on the bike and ignited it so that they could run away as soon as Kavya came out. He kept the ignition on just in case they had to make a quick escape. After some time, Kavya came out and casually walked towards the bike as if nothing had happened. As she came closer, she increased her pace. ‘Fast…sit…sit…sit…’ Virat whispered. She quickly sat on the bike and they sped away. She turned to see the guard running out of the lounge with the bill in his hand. But Virat raced the bike at bullet speed. ‘How did you get out so smoothly?’ Virat asked. ‘I asked for directions to the washroom and slowly slipped out instead. The manager seemed to doubt me, but I maintained my cool and walked at a casual pace so that the guard standing outside wouldn’t stop me.’ They high-fived each other and screamed loudly in joy. Friendship isn’t about who you have known the longest. It’s about who came and never left your side even when you committed a crime. In this world where everything
seems uncertain, only one thing was definite: Virat and Kavya’s friendship…beyond words, beyond time, and beyond distance.
After returning from the lounge, they went to FC road as Virat wanted to eat chocolate paan. Kavya saw a man selling soap bubbles on the road. ‘Virat…even I want to blow those soap bubbles,’ Kavya said in a childish manner pointing towards the vendor selling them. Virat obliged to avoid the similar chaos that had occured a few minutes ago at the lounge. He knew she would create havoc if he didn’t buy her those soap bubbles. Little did he know that there was no stopping her and that she would go wilder with each act. As soon as he purchased it, she started blowing bubbles on passersby and troubling them. It became difficult for Virat to control her but even amid this chaos, he couldn’t help but laugh at her childishness. Eventually, Virat took her by the hand and dragged her away from the scene before she could make life miserable for other people. She continued blowing the bubbles sitting behind on the bike. She saw two girls on a scooty parallel to them. The bad girl in her awakened and seconds later, she started bothering them. ‘Are you lesbians? You want to try a threesome?’ she teased the girls. ‘Yeah, please take her along with you. Make her sit between you. She is in a real need of a threesome,’ Virat added and started laughing. Without speaking a word, the girls raced their scooty and ran away. Virat and Kavya had fun eve-teasing all the bikers they crossed, till they reached his apartment. ‘What a day it was. I will never forget this my entire life,’ Virat sighed as he parked the bike. ‘Seriously. We had an awesome time together. We should do this more often,’ Kavya laughed trying to walk properly. The effect of alcohol was taking its toll on her. Virat helped her by holding her hands and taking her upstairs. ‘You are staying here tonight. I am not letting you go home in this condition.’ ‘No, I have to go. Bye,’ said Kavya trying to push Virat away. Virat threatened to inform her parents. He took her inside and made her sit on the couch. She relaxed a bit and started laughing again, without a reason. Virat freshened up and decided to make some Maggi for the two of them. Kavya always loved her Maggi with a seasoning of oregano. She never missed an opportunity to eat it whenever she stayed back at Virat’s apartment. While Virat was in the kitchen, Kavya opened his laptop to browse through the folders. ‘Virat, where are my Accounts assignment’s pictures?’ she asked.
‘Now why do you need them at this hour? Don’t tell me you are going to write it now,’ Virat shouted from the kitchen. ‘No, I just wanted to see them.’ ‘They are in the Daily chores folder, E drive.’ Virat poured out the cooked Maggie from the saucepan into a dish and was about to put ketchup on top when he realized that the folder contained some B-grade movies. He kept the ketchup aside and ran into the bedroom to stop Kavya from accessing his folder in time. But it was too late! ‘So these are your daily chores?’ Kavya teased, turning the laptop towards him. Virat tried to snatch the laptop away from her but even in her tipsy state she wouldn’t let him take it easily, and put up quite a fight. ‘Kavya, this is not fair yaar. Some things are really personal and even you should not touch them,’ he pleaded. However, Kavya didn’t show him any mercy. She in fact insisted that they watch one of the movies together while eating Maggi. Virat flatly refused but ultimately gave up when he realized that arguing with Kavya would be futile. He made himself comfortable on the bed, next to Kavya, and played a random movie from the folder. ‘I don’t want to watch this one. Play the other one which had…’ Virat stopped her short saying all movies had the same content and it didn’t really matter which one they watched. With every noodle she slurped, she watched the movie with more curiosity. It was the first time she was watching anything like this and was enjoying herself thoroughly. ‘See, this guy looks like you,’ she said pointing towards the hero of the movie. ‘Shut up. Look at the girl; she looks exactly the way you were looking in the morning wearing that sultry dress,’ Virat laughed. Before Kavya could finish her Maggi, Virat fell asleep. She shut down the laptop and smiled thinking about all the fun they had together. Though Kavya behaved like a kid, Virat loved the child in her. She would always say, ‘I don’t need anyone who is mature enough to stop me from acting immature. What I need is someone who can adore my immaturity and maturely understand me.’ No one, except for Virat, would be able to tolerate Kavya’s childish behaviour post drinking. Similarly no one could tolerate Virat’s untidy nature but Kavya. They were perfectly made for each other; friends who did silly stuff together, laughed at each other when they fell, and lived life their way without giving a damn to the people around them.