Kanta Bai died on a Friday in February. Just four days earlier, on Tuesday morning, she had woken up with a fever. She prided herself on her resilience, and cultivated a fine contempt for doctors. She had told me that more people died from going to hospitals than from their diseases. So she drank glass after glass of mausambi juice, and went out to her tharrastill as usual. She met her employees and sent out her consignments. By late afternoon she was very tired, and came back home and slept. She woke at eleven at night, shivering, with pain in her arms and legs, and loose motions. But still she – the fool who believed that she would survive anything, bacterial or human – she didn’t call a doctor. She ate a plate of rice with curd, took two Lopamide tablets and sent her people away. At eight that morning her sister found her, eyes rolled up, torso twisted in soiled sheets. I learnt of this at nine, after they had already taken her to a private hospital in Andheri. She had malaria, the doctors said. I had her moved to Jaslok, and told the doctors that they should give her any foreign medicine, any treatment she needed. But she was dead on Friday afternoon. We took her to the electric crematorium in Marine Lines. When she was laid out on the track that led into the ﬁre, her cheeks were fallen, and her body under the sheet looked flattened, as if the quick sickness had shrunk her. Her skin no longer had that dark, reddish bloom, it was pale mud. I forced myself to look as the metal doors closed her off from us for ever. And then I stayed until they gave her sister the ashes. I could do nothing but sit quietly next to this sister as we waited, and then give her a ride home. I had done nothing to save Kanta Bai – this thought tormented me that day, and over the nights that followed. I told the boys to pay attention to their health, and to seek medical advice as soon as they felt an illness coming on. I gave free physical check-ups to all my controllers, and started an anti-malarial campaign in the basti. I had the gutters cleaned, and took measures to remove pools of stagnant water. But I was only putting on a show. I knew I had been defeated. 
 
It was at this time that they came to me. I want you to know that, Sartaj Singh. I never went to politicians, they came to me. I had Gopalmath, I had all the area that had belonged to the Cobra Gang, I had my hand in many businesses, money came in, and apart from the matter of Kanta Bai I was happy. I had dealings with corporators often, especially when we were arranging regular water supply to Gopalmath, but I had no liking for the breed, they were born lying. I had no love for politicians, and so I never tried to cultivate MLAs and MPs. But Paritosh Shah brought one of them to me. He said, ‘Bhai, this is Bipin Bhonsle. He’s standing for assembly elections next month and needs your help.’ Now this Bipin Bhonsle, he was smartly dressed, good blue pants, printed shirt, dark glasses, he didn’t look at all like those khadi-kurta bastards with their Nehru-topis who you see on television all the time. Bipin Bhonsle was young, my age and respectful. ‘Namaskar, Ganesh Bhai,’ he said. ‘I have heard a lot about you.’ ‘This fat man has been telling you?’ I said, waving Bhonsle to a chair. I took Paritosh Shah by the hand and made him sit next to me on the divan. He had grown and grown in the several years I had known him, so that the Paritosh Shah I first knew was disappearing slowly inside this cushioned mass. ‘Look at him wheeze. I worry about his heart.’ He was breathing hard from his climb up the two ﬂights of stairs. Paritosh Shah patted my arm. ‘I am taking Ayurvedic medicine, bhai. No need to worry.’ He had told me about his new Ayurvedic doctor, who had ﬁve computers in his air-conditioned clinic. ‘Better that you run a few miles every day,’ I said. He made a running motion with his arms, pumping them up and down, and he looked so funny, with his jiggling breasts and his belly swaying from side to side, that I burst out laughing, and then he did. But Bipin Bhonsle only smiled, and not too much. I liked that. He had good manners. Meanwhile a boy brought out tea and biscuits. We drank and talked. The job was simple enough, I thought. Bipin Bhonsle was the Rakshak candidate for the constituency of Morwada, which bordered Gopalmath to the north. The voting population in his area was less than half white-collar Marathas, people who had lived there long before the building boom, before the developers had started building the posh colonies in the suburbs. Bipin Bhonsle was sure of these Marathas, of the ofﬁce workers and Class II government ofﬁcers and clerks, as he was of the pockets of Gujarati and Marwari shopkeepers and traders scattered here and there. The problem was the other half, the Congress voters and 
 
the RPI diehards who lived in the Narayan Housing Colony and around Satyasagara Estates and in the bastis of Gandhinagar and Lalghar. The Rakshaks had never been able to win an election in Morwada, mainly because of these bastards, who were all sorts, seths and professionals and airline crew and retirees, but Bipin Bhonsle was most resentful of the poor chutiyas who lived in the shacks of Lalghar. ‘Bhenchod landyas,’ he said. ‘Of course not one vote for us from there. You put out a hand of friendship to them, they turn away.’ Lalghar was a Muslim basti, so of course there were no votes for the Rakshaks from there. To expect votes from people you made a policy of hating was stupid, and typical of the Rakshaks, but I smiled politely at Bipin Bhonsle. ‘So, Bhonsle Saab,’ I said. ‘What can I do for you?’ He put his teacup down and sat forward on his chair, very eager. ‘Bhai, first we need help with the campaigning. They intimidate our workers when they go out to canvass, only yesterday they pushed around some of our people and grabbed our posters from them. They took two hundred and ﬁfty posters. Later we heard they made a bonﬁre out of them.’ ‘And you Rakshaks are so helpless? I’ve never heard of you people needing to hire anyone. You have your own boys and your own weapons.’ He heard my sneer, and didn’t like it. But he was still soft and polite. ‘Bhai, we aren’t scared of anyone. But I am very junior in our organization, this is my first election, and anyway this constituency is not considered that important. All the resources will go elsewhere. And I know those Congress and RPI bastards have brought in a lot of muscle. Even those Samajwadi fellows, I hear, are planning to strengthen up.’ ‘All right. So?’ ‘Once the campaigning stops, on the voting day, those are the crucial hours. We want to make sure that certain people don’t vote.’ I laughed. ‘Okay. You want the election given to you.’ He wasn’t embarrassed. He smiled, and said, ‘Yes, bhai.’ ‘I thought you Rakshaks wanted to clean out corruption in the country.’ ‘When the whole world is dirty, bhai, you have to get dirty to do any cleaning. We can’t fight their money without tricks. Once we are in power, it will all be different. We will change everything.’ ‘Don’t forget me then. Don’t forget and clean me out with the general cleaning.’ He held out both his hands towards me. ‘You, bhai? No, no, you’re our friend, one of us.’ 
 
He meant that I was a Hindu, and a Maharashtrian. I didn’t care for any of those things, not where business was concerned, but he was reassured that I was Ganesh Gaitonde. I shook his hand, and said, ‘We’ll meet in a day or two. We’ll talk then about how much money will be needed.’ ‘Bhai, money can be managed. Please take your time to think about it, and just tell us what your requirements are. I think we will need ﬁfty, sixty boys.’ He stood up and folded his hands. ‘Let me know when to come.’ After he was gone, I said to Paritosh Shah, ‘Level-headed chutiya.’ ‘He’s a little mad, like all those Rakshaks.’ Paritosh Shah believed ﬁercely in proﬁt, and gain was his god, so anyone who let religion interfere in money-making was quite obviously crazy to him. The Rakshaks believed in a golden past, and blood and soil, and all such things, which made no sense to Paritosh Shah. I said, ‘Not so mad. He’s hiring us as much because he doesn’t want us to work for one of his opponents as he is hiring us for our help.’ ‘That is true. I didn’t say he was stupid. These Marathas are mad but cunning. You know that.’ ‘Where are you from?’ I said. ‘From Bombay?’ ‘I was born here. My great-grandfather came here from Ahmedabad, we still have relatives there.’ He was puzzled. We had known each other for many years but I had never asked these questions. But now since I had asked, he did also. ‘And you?’ he said. ‘Where are you from?’ I waved my arm over my shoulder. ‘Somewhere.’ I stood up. ‘How much do we charge them for an election?’ And so we talked about money. It seemed to me that to give somebody an election was to make them a raja, or at least a minor nawab, and so our help was worth a lot. But it seemed that this business of giving and taking elections was an old-established one, and there were already set rates, not princely ones. Twenty-ﬁve thousand to each boy, maybe ﬁfty for the controllers. So for only twenty-ﬁve, thirty lakhs to us, Bipin Bhonsle would become a member of the Assembly. ‘You can buy democracy for that much?’ I said to Paritosh Shah. ‘Now you want to become a politician yourself.’ ‘Not even if they were giving away seats.’ ‘Why?’ He was smiling indulgently. I shrugged. I had a congestion in my throat, a swelling of memory and anger, and I didn’t trust myself to speak. So I spat out of the window, dismissed the whole ﬁlthy business of it, the lying posters and the whorish speeches and the pretended humility, and he knew me well enough not to ask more. Anyway, he was happy to talk about business. 
 
After he left I turned to my English books. I was teaching myself, with children’s books and the newspapers and a dictionary. Only Chotta Badriya knew, because he had bought me the books and the dictionary. I closed my door when I studied English because I didn’t want anyone seeing me squatting on the ﬂoor, one uncertain and slow ﬁnger on the letters, which I had to laboriously knock together with moving lips until they adhered into a word: ‘p-a-r-l-i-a-m-e-n-t . . . parliament’. It was humiliating, but necessary. I knew that much of the real business of the country was done in English. People like me, my boys, we used English, there were certain words we used with ﬂuency in our sentences, without hesitation. ‘Bole to voh edkum danger aadmi hai!’ and ‘Yaar, abhi ek matter ko settle karna hai,’ and ‘Us side se wire de, chutiya’. But unless you could rattle off whole sentences without having to stop and struggle and go back and build them bit by bitter bit, unless you could make jokes, there were whole parts of your own life that were invisible to you yourself, gone from you. You could live in a Marathi world, or a Hindi colony, or a Tamil lane, but what were those hoardings speaking, those towering messages that threw their sharp-edged shadows over your home? When you bought an expensive new shampoo ‘Made with American Knowhow’, what was that it said in red on the label? What were they laughing about, the people who skimmed by smoothly in their cushiony Pajeros? There were many like me, born far from English, who were content to live in ignorance. Most were too lazy, too afraid to ask how, why, what. But I had to know. So I took English, I wrestled with it and made it give itself to me, piece by piece. It was difﬁcult, but I was persistent. At four in the afternoon I closed my books and lay myself down on the ﬂoor and took a nap. I had a good bed, soft pillows, but of late I had been sleeping badly at night. An uncontrollable twitching in my limbs woke me as soon as I settled into slumber. I sometimes managed an hour in the afternoon, but today I thrashed about, full of plans, angles for the future, thoughts of expansion, suspicions about this man and sudden insights into that one. I ruled my corner of the island but couldn’t still my mind. The cool pressure of the ﬂoor seemed to help, its rigid discomfort drew me to the surface of my skin and kept me there, in a hazy doze. When a boy knocked on the door at five, I jerked up with my heart squeezing hard. I washed my face, took deep breaths and then we went out. Once a day, at different times but always once a day, I took my boys and walked through my area. We took different routes, I wasn’t stupid, but I wanted to show myself, to be seen. I won’t tell you that there was no fear in me, 
 
but I had learnt to bury it, to layer it over with thick sheets of indifference. Ever since that bullet had hurled into me, I knew how real death was. I had no illusions. I had seen that a woman can be alive one day, eating mutton and sneering and joking and thrusting out her chest, her eyes humming with laughter and hunger, and then the next day can ﬁnd her unconscious in a hospital bed, her mouth open and gasping. I knew I was going to die, I was going to be killed. There was no escape for me. I had no future, no life, no retirement, no easy old age. To imagine any of that was cowardice. A bullet would ﬁnd me ﬁrst. But I would live like a king. I would ﬁght this life, this bitch that sentences us to death, and I would eat her up, consume her every minute of every day. So I walked my streets like a lord of mankind, ﬂanked by my boys. And so I maintained my grip, my reign. Fear was part of it, the fear the shopkeepers felt when they looked at me, the fear in the eyes of women who stepped back into doorways to let us pass. But that was not all, not at all. There is of course an excitement in the exercise of power, but there is also a safety in the bending to it. I tell you this is true. I felt it when they gave me chicken tikka and bhakri, and asked me if I wanted a cold drink or tea, I knew it in the widening pools of their pupils when they dragged out their best chair for me and dusted it with their pallus. The truth is that human beings like to be ruled. They will talk and talk about freedom, but they are afraid of it. Overpowered by me, they were safe, and happy. Fear of me taught them where they could live, it made them a fence, inside which was home. And I was good to them. I was fair, and didn’t ask for so much money that it would hurt, and I taught my boys restraint, and above all I was generous. A factory worker had his leg broken under a tipping loader, and I supported his family for six months; a grandmother needed an operation to widen her veins and save her heart, and I gave her life, a chance to play with her children’s children. ‘Ganesh Bhai,’ said a printer to me one afternoon, ‘let me make a ﬁrst-class business card for you.’ But I didn’t need any card. My name was known in my raj, and there were many who blessed it. That evening, after my conversation with Bipin Bhonsle and my walk, I went to Paritosh Shah’s house. His eldest daughter, first of four, was to be married in seven days. The house was sparkling already, three storeys of cascading lights, red and green and blue, blinking happily. It was a big house, finished only a year ago by him and his two brothers, and they lived in it all together, wives and cousins and countless visiting mamas and kakas, a whirling Gujarati chakkar. Dandia raas before 
 
weddings was definitely out of style, but for all his business innovation, Paritosh Shah was a firm traditionalist. So there were excited eddies of young girls in the courtyard, swirls of heady silk. They were waiting for me to start the dancing, and once I was seated in an armchair, all the men and women fell into four circles, the children in the inner two, and the singer raised a declamatory hand and began, ‘Radha game ke game Mira’, and the circles whirled slowly, and then faster, and the steady clap-clap of hands echoed out the happy beat. When they brought out the sticks for dandia I stood up and asked for a pair. They laughed to see me tripping clumsily, unable to keep time inside the circles moving against each other, unable to find the clicking rhythm. I think at first this was equally the fault of the other dancers, especially the men, who were afraid to be dancing with me, stripped of their grace by my presence. They hesitated to knock their dandias against mine, they were scared of putting in too much force, they shrank from my strokes. But when they saw how I laughed at myself, and when my boys, who were leaning against the pillars, shook their heads and smiled, everyone relaxed, and the disco-dandia song tumbled on gleefully, and I found my hips loosening, and my shoulders were easy, and I was flowing, falling into step without effort, and the dandia rose and fell, a flourish here and click, another swing and click, a round face spinning to me and click, and I was dancing. 
At home Chotta Badriya had a woman waiting for me. I was happy from the dancing, humming away and doing a step here, another one there. But she brought me down. There’s nothing more depressing than a depressed randi. She was nicely plump and with a little round nose, and nineteen, but she lay there with a swollen batata-wada face, and I tried to liven her up with a few nips and pinches and squeezes, but she winced and set her jaw, so I took her by the hair and threw her out. Then I drank some milk, lay on my side wrapped around a pillow and tried for sleep, but it larked away from me and my head was full of the dandia and Paritosh Shah and the lights skidding down the side of his house and up again, and I turned to the other side, and now I thought of the men I had killed. I stood them in a row and compared them for character and strength and I decided I was better than any of them, and then I made plans to have the approaches to my house checked and tested, and to put more boys in place at the head of the lanes, just in case. It was late now, very late, and for the ﬁrst time in many months, I used my hand on myself, and all the 
 
women I had known came and slid over me and also Rati Agnihotri with her malai skin. After I was ﬁnished I turned again, back to the other side, settled down into comfort and took regular, deep breaths. But finally I threw off the covers and cursed and reached for the clock. Three fortyﬁve. I would have drunk then, anything, a bottleful of whisky or rum, but there was nothing in the house, and I would have got the boys to bring some, but the thought of what they would think and not say made me ashamed, and I lay on my back and decided to see it through. I would get up from bed at six and have an early day. I watched the fan gleam in its flight and then suddenly I was waking up and it was bright day, and I could hear the street fully alive outside. Noon. I had slept for six hours, maybe seven, but I was tired. 
My exhaustion deepened as the days passed, as we fought the elections. My boys went out with the Rakshaks, and we pushed their campaign into every nook, their posters harangued the voters from every surface for miles. Two of my boys, armed with pistols, with a group of Rakshaks was enough to keep the peace and let them do their work calmly, no bhangad. A reputation for ruthlessness can do wonders for peace. For us, it was easy money. Meanwhile, it was almost time for the wedding. Even before the ceremony I went to Paritosh Shah’s house for the mehndi party, and I could see that he appreciated it, that I was so much a part of his joys and sorrows. Even in the midst of the thousand things he had to do, food and gifts and hotel arrangements for the groom’s relatives, he noticed my wobbliness, how I was holding on to wakefulness with effort. ‘Your doshas are out of balance,’ he said. ‘I’ll set up an appointment for you with my Ayurvedic man.’ ‘I won’t put myself in that bastard’s clutches,’ I said. ‘It’s just insomnia. It’ll pass.’ ‘Nothing is just anything. The body is speaking to you. But you won’t listen.’ Then he had to go and sit with the women, and the jewellers. There was some question of how many tolas of gold were to be used in the wide necklaces and bracelets and earrings for the dowry, how much payment for the making. I watched him step delicately down the steps to the courtyard and wondered what his body was speaking. How did one read those sheets of fat that surged and billowed on his frame? I rubbed my eyes. He had been good to me. He had never lied to me about money, he had never pretended to lay aside his self-interest, he had backed me as far as possi
 
ble, to the risk of his life and then a little further, and he had shown me how in this world one thing connects to the next, where business comes together with politics and bhaigiri, how one must live. In this way we had been friends. He was a good man as far as he could be, he had grown fat with hard work, and so his bulk was his virtue. That was why his fat was light on him. The whole house was fragrant from the cooking. I was hungry, but very tired, and eating would tire me more, I knew this. But to leave without eating would be an insult, so I took a thali and touched some food, and then pushed myself to my feet, and waved up the boys, and told Paritosh Shah to take care of his guests while he tried to see me to the door, and after a little argument, ﬁnally off we went. I was looking for my shoes in the great sprawl of footwear near the front door when Dipika came to me. Dipika was Paritosh Shah’s second-oldest daughter, a serious-faced, quiet one with big-big eyes. She held out a thali piled with puris, and a glass, and said, ‘But you haven’t had any ras, Ganesh Bhai.’ I had, but I was willing to take another puri from her, polite as she was. As I reached out she whispered, with her head still down, ‘Can I please talk to you, Ganesh Bhai?’ On the edge of the thali her thumbs were white. So I took her, thali and glass and all, outside to the car and we talked. ‘They’re already talking about my marriage,’ she said bitterly. ‘And my sister’s not married yet.’ ‘They’re your parents,’ I said. ‘Of course they will. And you’ll be happy, it’s a good thing.’ I knew that she was going to college, and I thought that she must have some modern-girl fashionable objection to marriage, some idea of job and career, all got from some silly magazine, so I started lecturing her on her duty, what real life was. She shifted about restlessly, rustling her red and green ghagra and gold chunni. ‘But, Ganesh Bhai,’ she said. ‘Don’t do but-this-and-that,’ I said. ‘Your parents are right.’ ‘But, Ganesh Bhai,’ she said, with a little wail to her voice, ‘I want to get married.’ And right then, from the small, painful furrowings on her smooth forehead, I knew this was going to be a lot more trouble than just girlish fantasies about a career. ‘What?’ I said. ‘You have someone in mind?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Where did you meet him? In college?’ She shook her head. ‘NN College is all girls. His sister is my friend. She goes to NN.’ 
 
‘What’s his name?’ At least she still had the grace to be shy. Two tries, and a lot of blushing, and she got it out. ‘Prashant.’ ‘What’s the trouble? He’s not Gujarati?’ ‘No, Ganesh Bhai.’ ‘What then? Maratha?’ A rapid shake of the head, and now she had her frantic grip on the thali again. ‘Then what?’ She had her face almost in the thali now. ‘Dalit,’ she said. ‘And he’s poor.’ Her problem was gigantic, as elephantine as her father. I had always found the Gujaratis to be more advanced, more tolerant than other communities, but this would strain her father’s understanding. He would do business with anyone, but marriage was another matter. He had sent her to college, but not for this, not to marry some gaandu who was not only a Dalit but a poor Dalit. Maybe a very rich Dalit could have been approved, but I could hear Paritosh Shah saying it already, ‘This is the family you want to marry us into?’ Her mother and aunts would be harsher, more violent in their disapproval. Young Dipika had set herself to a hard battle. ‘Why do you want to do this to your family?’ I said. ‘This is not some film. Your father will have this Prashant of yours torn to pieces.’ She looked directly at me then, and her back straightened, and her neck was graceful in its anger. ‘I know it’s not a ﬁlm,’ she said. ‘I’ll die, Ganesh Bhai. If anything happens to him, I’ll kill myself.’ How little the young value life, they who are so full of it. How little they have seen of death. They think it’s a mere pause in a drama, and they imagine the oppressing parents beating their breasts and wailing, and lost in that pleasure they never see the fall, the ﬁnality of one’s own vanishing. I said as much to Dipika, and she laughed. ‘I’m not a child,’ she said, and I saw then how far she had gone with this Prashant, her young woman’s splendid pride in the pleasures she had taken and given. ‘What do you want me to do, Dipika?’ I said. ‘Talk to Papa. He will listen to you.’ She took my hand and placed it on top of her head. ‘Since I was a girl you have been kind to me. And I know you do not think in any old-fashioned way.’ What she meant was that in my company there were Brahmins and Marathas and Muslims and Dalits and OBCs, all working together, with
 
out difference or suspicion. We had OBCs who were controllers, and Brahmins who were foot-soldiers, and nobody gave it a thought. Muslims and Hindus were yaars who put their lives in each other’s palms every day, every night. But this was not special to my company, it was true of many others. We who were bhais were truly brothers, we lived outside the law and were bound to each other. We were desperate men, and therefore free. But a company was a company, and marriage – especially in a joint family like hers – was something else. But how to tell this child, who now held my hand in both of hers, how? ‘Go inside,’ I said. ‘Do nothing. Say nothing to anyone, not one person. Let me think about this.’ She was now dripping tears down her chin. I wiped her face with her pallu, and set her on her way with her wobbly thali. And I told Chotta Badriya that we were going to drive out to Film City. ‘Now, bhai?’ he said. ‘No, next week, chutiya,’ I said. ‘Get in the car.’ He was a funny boy, that one, built like a truck, not scared of swords, willing to play with ﬂying bullets, but scared of Film City in the dark because someone had told him that leopards came down from the wooded hills at night. He sat next to the driver with his arm draped over the back of the seat and his ﬁngers drumming nervously. Finally I clamped down his hand gently, and said, ‘Okay, okay, stop shaking so much. You can stay in the car.’ He waggled his head delightedly. ‘Yes, bhai. I’ll watch the car.’ Every man in the car burst out laughing. I slapped the back of his head. ‘Bhadve, you guard it fiercely, okay? Make sure the mosquitoes don’t steal it, okay? And if a big cockroach comes, you blow him to pieces with your gullel, okay?’ We laughed all the way to Film City. We slowed a bit for the guards at the gate, and then swept up the rising road, through the sudden darkness and quiet of the bushy slopes. It was already dusk, so the road was clear. There were the clustering shadows under the leaves, the ﬂashing jigsaw of branches, and then suddenly in the clear there was a looming castle, highturreted and ﬂuttering with ﬂags in the coming moonlight. It was made of wood and canvas, of course, but in this light it was absolutely real. We went past an entire Goan town square, capped by a high church holding up its crucifix, and also a fishing dock with boats asleep against each other in a leaning row. Here, in Film City, they made dreams of perfect love, they choreographed the songs that Dipika and her boyfriend no doubt sang to each other. The road curved sharply, and the engine 
 
whined, and we went up and up, to the helipad. The moon was low and close, hanging just above the lip of the high hills, and the valleys were cut sharply into silver and black, and a breeze slid up my neck. This was the deep quiet I craved, away from the city, that I came for again and again. I stepped to the edge of the helipad and the boys let me go, they stood in a distant arc and left me alone. I sat at the edge of the plateau, and looked for a leopard in the dappled patterning below. Come on, leopard, I said. Save me from this problem. I had promised the girl I would help, but how? She was a clever one, asking first and drawing me to her side. Otherwise, if her father had found out first, and asked me, without a thought I would have had her tattered Dalit boyfriend picked up and dropped off a cliff. Just like that. But now what? The daughter had asked for mercy, and I was Ganesh Gaitonde. But the father was my friend. I sat until the moon had receded into the heights of the sky, and the leopard didn’t come, and no easy answers. There was no solving this problem by killing anyone, and no amount of money would buy peace. There was love between the father and daughter, and so they would hate each other all the more, and wound each other, cutting nerves no assassin could ever reach. I got up and walked back through the boys, who sat in a dozing line. They staggered up and came after me, to the car. Chotta Badriya was fast asleep, his face against the window glass, lips plumped up and cheek ﬂattened. I tapped the glass at his nose, and he came awake, groping under his shirt until he saw me. In that ﬁrst waking clutch at the world, he had been afraid. I recognized the panic. We were all afraid. To walk out of the house, into a city street, into the air which hummed with the bullets of the next moment, to do this we cast aside fear, dropped it and pushed it into the deepest valley where the moon never shone. But the fear still moved, lived and fed, like an animal in the night. Chotta Badriya liked girls, very young ones. He even liked smallish women of older years who had no mausambis, who were ﬂat before and behind and wore pigtails for him and sat on his lap and talked of dolls and held their heads to the side and giggled. He chodoed them sometimes, but I think only because the other boys would have laughed at him otherwise. For himself, he would have been happy just to hold them, to play at a dream of play, and so live a childhood which was free of the future. Now he was clearing his throat mightily and rolling down the window to spit. ‘Bastard,’ I said. ‘What a ﬁne guard you are.’ ‘Sorry, bhai,’ he said. ‘I was seeing leopards all over the place. So I thought I would never sleep. But then suddenly I must have fallen asleep.’ 
 
‘You were, chutiya. Like a baby.’ But I was rubbing the top of his head. He was a good boy. Brave and watchful, watchful for me, and intelligent. He noticed things, the look on people’s faces, cars parked where they shouldn’t be, and felt rumours on his nerve-endings. But he couldn’t help me now, with my quandary, my delicate puzzle which could break hearts and heads. None of them could. It made me angry, this sudden slide down and back into the slithering mess of family. I had lifted away, I had left everything behind. I had been alone. But there was no escape. The wheels slapped at the road and we went back to the city. 
The next day we waged the ﬁnal battles of the elections. Bipin Bhonsle called again and again, polite as he had been during our ﬁrst meeting, but nerve-racked and needing reassurance that we would give him his precious seat yet. The Congress incumbent had been going around the bastis, handing out hundred-rupee notes and rum and whole sheep to the citizens. Good fresh mutton is the basis of many a political career, I came to know. It made sense. A poor man ﬁlls his stomach, he takes pleasure in his dinner, he lubricates himself with two free pegs, maybe three, not too many because he has other plans, he rides his wife, in the morning they both go to the voting booth happy, in that uplifted haze their bodies feel light, and they forget all about how the khadi-wearing bhenchod politician has done nothing for them for years, how he has robbed and stolen and maybe murdered. All of that is gone, vanished, and the happy couple cast their votes, and the servant of the people is in once again, ready to serve them out of roti, kapda and makaan. Hungry, naked and without shelter, they have no memory after meat. So you feed sheep to sheep to herd them in the right direction, towards the slaughterhouse gate. Quite simple. But I had my own schemes ready. For two days I had sent out rumours. My boys went into the markets and bazaars and restaurants of the Congress and RPI areas and whispered, ‘The goondas are coming on election day, thugs have been hired.’ A rumour is the most cost-effective weapon ever, anywhere, you start it for nothing and then it grows, mutates, has offspring. In the morning you plant a little red squirming worm in some shopkeeper’s ears and by night there are a hundred skyscraper-sized gory Ghatotkachas stalking the land. So I had the enemy voters nicely primed, covered in a sticky marinade of fear. Now it was time to stoke the ﬁre. I had thirty motorcycles ready, with licence plates removed. We put two boys on each, faces covered with dakoo scarves, 
 
with bags full of soda bottles for the pillion riders, a crate’s worth for every bike. They went roaring out into the lanes. Through the enemy area they went, roaring and hooting. They cleared the streets with the bottles, gave each bottle a few shakes and lobbed it end over end at the few citizens brave enough to be still walking around. The glass ﬂies like shrapnel, but really with soda bottles it’s the shattering burst that does the trick, sends the trembling civilians scuttling back to their homes with their pants heavy with piss. The boys had a good time, riding around in the cool of the morning, exercising their bowling arms. Chotta Badriya came back home ﬂushed red and singing. ‘Any more, bhai?’ he yelled up to me from the road. I was sitting on the water tank on the roof. ‘Any more to do?’ ‘Bas, Badriya, bas,’ I said. ‘Calm down. That was enough. Now the police will come.’ ‘Phatak, phachak, the bottles burst, bhai.’ ‘I know.’ ‘Great fun, bhai.’ ‘I know. Now sit quietly, and maybe we’ll do it again next year.’ Sure the police came, they came running to the affected areas. They came with their rifles and lathis all ready. Inspector Samant slipped around a corner and found a phone and called me. ‘DCP Saab and ACP Saab are here, bhai,’ he said. ‘You got everybody moving. We are patrolling the streets. Preventing any disturbances, you see.’ ‘Good, good,’ I said. Bipin Bhonsle had paid the policemen too, all the way to the top. They would organize the right kind of peace. ‘No more disturbances must happen. But you see anyone on the roads?’ ‘Not one man, not one woman. I see only three dogs.’ ‘Good,’ I said. ‘Typical Congress voters. We’ll let them go.’ So I laughed and put down the phone. Just this much was enough to keep the enemy at home, to make the battleﬁeld ours. No booth-capturing, no ballot-stufﬁng, just this. Meanwhile the boys had fanned out in our areas, and were taking the voters to the booths. ‘We are from the Fair Election Committee,’ they said, and they took our voters, in tens and twenties, to the voting centres. ‘All is peaceful,’ they said. ‘Come, come.’ And the voters came, safe and escorted, and Bipin Bhonsle’s men, wearing nice yellow party badges, smiled at them outside the booths. And the voters filed in, and were left all alone, and they made their little black marks on the ballot, and the folded pieces of paper fell into the slotted wooden boxes, making small rustles, and the lines moved efficiently 
 
along, and the day passed, and so the machinery of democracy moved and spun, with a little help from us. In Gopalmath, I sat on my roof and did my daily business. In the courtyard below, and out on the street, the usual clusters of supplicants gathered. Money was brought in, and I gave it out. Lives were brought to me, and I mended them. I gave justice. I ruled. The sun puddled, hovered and died its daily death. I ate, and retired to my bedroom. It was another quiet, ordinary day. Bipin Bhonsle won by six thousand three hundred and forty threevotes. 
I was dreading the wedding. Of course I had to go, but I didn’t know how I would face Dipika, show her my face with no magic solution to grant her eternal happiness. I was angered by this feeling of helplessness, this paralysis of will. The problem stayed with me, gnawing with a thousand tiny teeth at the edges of my mind, like a ﬂood of relentless ants. I was furious with Dipika. Who was she? What did she mean to me, that I owed her this? A little nothing of a girl, to come between me and my friend, to haunt and bother me with her huge staring eyes, she wasn’t even pretty, why couldn’t I just tell her to take her dirty mashooq and go to hell? Why? But I couldn’t. She had begged me, and I had made a promise. There was no logic in it, but it was the truth, it had happened. So I had to act. But I still didn’t know what I was going to do. I took my gifts – gold bracelets, gold earrings and a gold necklace – and went to Paritosh Shah’s house on the wedding day. I hardly had my shoes off when Dipika came running to the door, stopped herself from falling by clutching at the jamb. She swayed there, in her sari of gold, and I could sense my boys averting their eyes. I knew they were thinking: what is Bhai doing now? This much was all it took to start a story that would get longer and fuller as it went out across the city. ‘Beti,’ I said. I patted her head paternally. Then I took her by the shoulder and led her inside. In a corridor, while her aunts and cousins brushed past, all shiny and magnificent in their very best, I leaned close to her and pretended to give her something out of my wallet. ‘Be calm, you fool,’ I told her. ‘If you act mad I can’t do anything for you. Behave yourself now. When I want to tell you something, I’ll tell you.’ ‘But,’ she said. ‘But.’ ‘Be quiet,’ I said. ‘If you want to do this big thing, be brave. Control yourself. Learn control. Leave fear behind. Look at me. Learn from me. 
 
You told me you were not a child, but you behave like one. Can you be a woman?’ She blinked away her tears, and wiped her nose with the edge of her pallu. Then she nodded. ‘Good,’ I said. ‘Go and be a part of your sister’s happiness. Be happy, or people will notice.’ She was still tremulous, aﬂicker with thin bolts of emotion up her neck and into her cheeks. ‘Listen to me,’ I said. ‘I am Ganesh Gaitonde, and I am telling you that everything will be all right. Ganesh Gaitonde is telling you this. Do you believe him?’ ‘Yes,’ she said, and as she said it she started to believe it. ‘Yes.’ ‘Go.’ She skipped off, and at the edge of the courtyard she took two little girls by the hand and whirled with them, and in their pealing laughter there was her happiness, as palpable as the breath of the hundreds of ﬂowers hanging in the doorways, on the walls. She was happy. I had given this to her, and I didn’t have it to give. I had no idea where to ﬁnd it, how. And so in the mandap, sitting next to Paritosh Shah, as the priests sang and thick sacriﬁcial smoke gusted from the ﬁre and an elder sister’s happiness was chanted into being, I was helpless before the younger sister’s life. Yes, Dipika was happy now, sitting behind her sister, leaning on her mother’s shoulder, her face ﬂushed and perspiring a little from the heat of the ﬁre, eyes gleaming wet from the sting of the smoke. Looking at her, I thought: what makes a woman so much a prisoner, why? Why is one man a Dalit and poor, and another not? Why does this happen, and not that? Why did this woman die, and not that one? Why are we not free? And the Sanskrit choruses moved under my skin and I felt them shiver my soul, and the question came to me: what is Ganesh Gaitonde? After all the functions were over, after the eating and drinking and rituals of farewell, I said goodbye to Paritosh Shah and his wife and his parents and his entire battalions of Gujaratis, and he walked with me to the car, and even in the midst of all this, he noticed my distraction, and asked, ‘What’s the matter, bhai? You look tired. Still not sleeping?’ ‘Yes, I’m very tired,’ I said. ‘Listen to me, then. You can’t go on like this. Take a Calmpose tonight, and tomorrow we will see to your health.’ ‘Tomorrow I need to ask you a favour.’ ‘Favour? What? Tell me now.’ He bent towards me, and had his arm over my shoulder. There was the big red smear of the tika on his forehead, and I could see the tiny white grains of rice in it. ‘Tell me.’ 
 
‘No, tomorrow, Paritosh Shah. Not today.’ ‘All right, tomorrow then.’ He came close to me, drew me into his soft, cushiony hug and thumped me on the back. ‘I’ll come to your place in the morning.’ ‘No, I’ll come to you.’ I squeezed his shoulder and drew away. ‘Let me.’ ‘Fine, whatever you say, boss. Whenever you’re ready. I’m here all day tomorrow.’ But he was puzzled. He was not used to this Ganesh Gaitonde. In truth, it was a Ganesh Gaitonde I didn’t know well, either. I had been struggling to get some sleep lately, but now I had been cut adrift, cast into some unknown, tossing waters by a mere slip, a sliver of a girl whom I hardly knew, owed nothing to. ‘Tomorrow,’ I said, raised a hand and went home. That night I didn’t care about seeming weak, and felt my own shame like a distant irritation. I took a Calmpose, and slept, but I dreamt of a black sea, heaving its endless swells at me, and nothing else was alive, nothing lived under that ﬂat white sky, and I was alone. 
Bipin Bhonsle came to me the next morning, with gifts. He brought the cash he owed me, in four plastic bags, but he also brought a brand-new Sony video player, and four tapes, all of American films, and four big boxes of mithai. He said, ‘My father told me, “Take him some good Scotch,” but I told him, “Ganesh Bhai doesn’t touch the stuff, and I can see why. That’s why he’s so efﬁcient.”’ He was sitting at the edge of the chair, all serious and enthusiastic. ‘You know what, Ganesh Bhai? I’ve made up my mind. From today, no more liquor for me also. I will learn from you. Now that we’ve won, there is a lot to do. No time now for drinking-shinking. We have to keep on winning.’ ‘Yes,’ I said. I had woken up more tired than before, and my legs were heavy, unwieldy, as if the blood had become congealed and dense. But I roused myself to Bipin Bhonsle’s eagerness. ‘Good, Bipin, good. A sober man is focused, he is awake, he is watchful. No need for all this whisky and rum. Life is enough.’ It was a speech I had given many times before. For him it was all new. ‘Right, Ganesh Bhai, of course: life is enough. But please, enjoy.’ He held out the tapes. ‘Each is an international hit, Ganesh Bhai. Action-packed. You will enjoy.’ He was so grateful it took an hour to get him out, and that only when I told him I was already late for a meeting at Paritosh Shah’s house. He left, but loudly protesting eternal loyalty, and anything I needed I should remember him, and of course he was only a small man 
 
but if there were anything I wanted I only had to call him, and on international pleasures he was an expert. ‘Hot tapes, electronics, cigars, anything, Ganesh Bhai, anything,’ he was saying even as he went down the stairs. He was wearing an orange shirt with a ﬂower print, and brown gabardine trousers, and shoes of a deep reddish-brown hue, gold-buckled and glowing. When he turned to wave from the gate, the chain at his neck ﬂashed ﬁercely in the sun. He was altogether a shiny man. We sped over to Paritosh Shah’s. I would rather have gone slowly, I still had no plan, no tactics of persuasion worked out. But I couldn’t say it to Chotta Badriya, go slow, don’t go, never go, because I am helpless. I was, after all, Ganesh Gaitonde. I had taken the role, now I had to play the part. So hero-like I got out of the car, walked to Paritosh Shah’s door, which was auspicious still with ﬂowers and vines, and into the house. By the time I was barefoot in the courtyard I had lost all my swagger and style. I entered Paritosh Shah’s ofﬁce quite humbly. He was on the phone, in one of his interminable dealings, arranging for money to go from here to there, breeding the currency notes with each other as they swept past him, and keeping one subtle, careful hand in the stream. Money leapt to him, and he delighted in its antics. He started to put a hand over the mouthpiece, and I waved him on. Talk, talk, I signed at him, my hands at my mouth, and I sat down and watched him. Behind him there was a gold-framed painting of Krishna with his ﬂute. The top of Paritosh Shah’s desk was gold, and he had ﬁve phones on it. The walls were a darker gold. I looked at Krishna, at his easy, turning stance and his slanty smile, and I hated him. You are arrogant, god. I changed seats, but Krishna’s eyes followed me. I couldn’t get away from him. Paritosh Shah put his phone down, all bright from the thrill of money. ‘Namaskar, my friend,’ he said. He rubbed his hands together and rocked back in his chair and looked happy with the world. And Krishna smiled at me from above his shoulder. Paritosh Shah had remembered by now our conversation from the day before. ‘So, bhai,’ he said. ‘What’s the matter? What can I do for you?’ In that moment I realized what Krishna was smiling at. I realized the limits of my power. And I told Paritosh Shah everything I knew and had found out about Dipika and her lover, that his name was Prashant Haralkar, that his father used to work for the sanitation department, that the mother had taken the children and left this alcoholic father twenty years ago. And also that Prashant Haralkar had been a dedicated student, that he had studied by the light of streetlamps and had gone to night col
 
lege, that he now had a permanent job with the BMC, and that he now lived in a small but good-enough house in Chembur and supported his mother and younger sisters. Paritosh Shah covered his face with both of his hands. I walked around the corner of the desk, and sat on the couch close to him. I put my hand on his knee, patted clumsily. He ﬂinched away from my touch. ‘Who will marry my children?’ he sobbed through his ﬁngers. I had no answer. I had promised Dipika happiness, but what about Paritosh Shah’s two other daughters and two sons, what were they to do? I could win elections, I could move men up the steep ladders of success and kill them in the next moment, I could burn down houses, seize land, bring half the city to a standstill with an arbitrary proclamation of a bandh, if that was my pleasure. But who would ﬁght the rows of meek matrons who had sat primly, heads covered, at the wedding of Paritosh Shah’s daughter? Who would push their portly husbands into enlightenment? Paritosh Shah’s natevaik would declare themselves busy in response to his invitations, they would forget to ask him to their functions, and their sons and daughters would be engaged and married elsewhere, no matter how much money he had or how close he was to me. And he would feel shame every time he saw some acquaintance, each time he walked in the street. Sitting next to Paritosh Shah, abased by his tears and unable to look at him, I knew how helpless I was. I would have beaten all his relatives, thrashed each of them with my shoes, broken all their smug, snug heads open to the modern air, if only that would have made any difference. But custom ﬂoats between men and women, it hides in the stomachs of children and escapes and expands and vanishes in every breath, you cannot kill it, you cannot hold it, you can only suffer it. ‘Have you met that bastard maderchod?’ Paritosh Shah asked. He was angry now. ‘No, I haven’t. Listen, I didn’t come to you for him. He matters less than an ant to me. But Dipika asked me.’ ‘Kill him,’ he said. ‘Just kill him.’ ‘Easily done,’ I said. ‘I’ll give the order now. In an hour he’ll be gone, no part of his body will ever be found, not one ﬁngernail. But then what? He’ll be gone and so she will be able to love him the rest of her life. And also hate you for the rest of her life.’ ‘She is young. This is foolishness. She will cry for a week and then she will forget him.’ 
 
‘Is that how much you know your daughter?’ His cheeks were burnished wet, and his jaw clenched and opened and shut, sending little rushes of torment up into his eyes and forehead. ‘She told me she would kill herself, and I believed her. Do you understand? I believed her. You’ll ﬁnd her dead.’ ‘Then what?’ He was walking in small circles now. ‘Let her marry him,’ I said. ‘Marry them quietly and send them away. Settle them in Madras, in Calcutta. Amsterdam, if you want.’ ‘That won’t change anything,’ he said. ‘Everybody will still know. If she suddenly goes, disappears, they’ll ask questions, they’ll make up stories. Everybody always knows. You can’t keep something like that a secret for ever. I am a well-known man.’ That he was. ‘Bhai,’ he said, ‘what do we do, bhai?’ ‘You won’t marry her to this fellow?’ ‘No. I can’t. You know that.’ So here we were. He was trapped, and I could do nothing. ‘Marry her today to someone else,’ I said. ‘Marry her this hour. Find a boy and get a pandit and marry her off now. Then send them away. Somewhere. Maybe she won’t kill herself. Maybe she will, but maybe she won’t.’ He was panting. ‘Yes,’ he said, and picked up the phone. I left by the back door to the house. I had betrayed Dipika, and I could not face her. They married her that afternoon, to a boy who was ﬂown down from Ahmedabad. Dipika and her husband went by the next morning’s ﬂight back to Ahmedabad. The in-laws told Paritosh Shah that after a few days of gloom, she seemed to have adjusted, she began to smile and laugh. Paritosh Shah was satisﬁed that the reality of the marriage had already erased the silly illusion of romance. The boy’s parents told him, over the phone, that Dipika was talking a lot to the younger girls in the family, and had been to the cinema twice with her husband and her devars and their wives. So, two months later, Dipika and her husband were sent on their honeymoon to Switzerland. On the ﬁfth night of the honeymoon, in Bern, she left the hotel suite while the husband was sleeping. She walked out of the lobby, and out of the gates and on to the road beyond. She was hit by a car that came fast around a curve. The driver said later that she was walking in the exact middle of the road, on the painted dividing lines, and he never had a chance to swerve, he didn’t even know what he had hit until he came to a halt and reversed. Dipika was killed instantly. The husband said she had seemed happy, that 
 
their relations were joyous, as between any new husband and wife. In the Swiss records they put it down as an accident. 
Three months after Dipika’s death, I was watching one of Bipin Bhonsle’s American movies when Paritosh Shah came to me. I had been awake all night, so excruciatingly awake that I could hear the creaking of the settling joists, the click of a passing dog’s toes on the concrete outside. I watched the red second-hand of my bedside clock scything smoothly around its eternal circle, and I felt it tearing at something inside my head. So I popped in one of Bipin Bhonsle’s tapes, switched on the television and pressed buttons on the control, and where there had been black fuzz a lion appeared, stretching its mouth in a yellow-toothed yawn. I watched, and the first time I understood very little. But I used the rewind button, and by morning I understood the story, who wanted what, what was standing in the way, and who must be killed. It was a good story, but it was the words that were the pleasure for me. I ran one scene back and forth, and the hero raced backwards under ﬁne white lines, jerky and clown-quick, and his mouth twisted, and sounds came out glistening with his anger, and I ran it back, and forward, and back, and the syllables fell on my ears like pattering drops, and suddenly they fell together and the sense came to me, he was asking, ‘Where did he go?’ He had his pistol ready and was asking, ‘Where did he go?’ And in that moment there was a humming joy in every part of me. ‘There,’ I shouted in English at the hero. ‘He went there.’ When that ﬁlm was over, I put in another one, and learned. Paritosh Shah came at nine o’clock, and sat on the bed and watched with me, watched another hero and his men move down a jungle river with water to their chests, their faces blackened. ‘These are commandos,’ I said. ‘Their country’s secret missile has been stolen by one bastard. So they are going to get it back from his jungle den.’ Paritosh Shah smiled. ‘A jungle den? It would be expensive to supply and maintain. That’s what I always wonder about. How do they get the oil and atta and onions to it, for so many henchmen?’ I switched off the tape. ‘You’re just too much of a bania,’ I said, ‘to appreciate a good story.’ ‘I just don’t understand these foreign ﬁlms.’ ‘I can see that. Everything all right at home?’ After Dipika’s death, his wife had taken to bed with palpitations of the heart. She was still weak, and given to ﬁts of crying. ‘We are going along,’ he said. ‘And you? Did you sleep?’ 
 
He knew that I lay awake at night, that I watched television in the grey hours of the morning, that I fell ﬁtfully asleep in the car on journeys. I shook my head. ‘I’ll take a pill tonight.’ He made a sweeping motion in the air between us, like a man wiping a window clean. ‘That’s what I wanted to talk to you about.’ ‘About sleeping pills? Your ved-maharaj has some new recipes?’ I had tried his Dhanwantri’s pills, had got indigestion and gas and no sleep, and had gone back to the allopathic doctor for his strongest medicines. ‘No. Not that,’ he said, very serious. ‘Listen, bhai, I think you should get married.’ ‘Me?’ ‘Look at you. You’re not happy. You can’t sleep. You’re distracted, you do this and that, nothing works. You’re restless. A man needs to settle down. You have everything now, you need to become a grahastha, start a family, everything has a place and time.’ ‘Marriage doesn’t bring happiness to all of us.’ ‘You mean Dipika. Bhai, she was my daughter. It wasn’t the marriage that was wrong, it was the other thing. Once she had gone past all boundaries, where was the chance for happiness? But you need to get married. All the scriptures say a life has its stages. First you are a student, then you are a householder. But you, you live like you’ve given up the world already. Look at this.’ He meant the room, the bare walls, the white sheets, the crusted thali from dinner on the ﬂoor. ‘Chotta Badriya and the boys are all very well, but they can’t be your life. You need a woman, she will make a home for you.’ ‘Who will marry me, Paritosh Bhai? Which respectable girl?’ ‘You worry too much, bhai,’ he said. ‘We have money. Everything is possible.’ Everything is possible. Yes, he and I had created possibilities, we had snatched dreams out of the air and snapped them into solidity. Everything was possible. And yet Kanta Bai and Dipika had died. Looking at Paritosh Shah, I was reminded of the smile of the god above his shoulder, the blue conjuror who had regarded me with his sleepy eyes. He had had a family too, many families. Now he was trying to trap me into one. Yes, I now knew that certain things were impossible, even for me, and it was true that money made marriages possible. Most of our boys had chavvis, and some of these chavvis became wives. Sometimes the parents objected, made a fuss about the boy’s profession, but always ﬁnally agreed. After all, the boy was earning, and earning good money. ‘Yes,’ I said sourly. 
 
‘Money can bring a bride. At least it can do that.’ ‘Do you have somebody to love-marry?’ Paritosh Shah said with the satisfaction of a player moving rapidly towards checkmate. ‘No.’ I had women aplenty, bar-girls, whores, would-be actresses. Certainly no one to marry. ‘Then don’t refuse me, bhai,’ he said. ‘You came to me that day and asked me for something. And I couldn’t give you what you wanted. But don’t say no to me today. I am asking you for something. Say yes, bhai.’ I knew in that moment that we are trapped for ever in the connections that wrap us from head to foot and bind us to each other, as invisible as gravity but as powerful. From this net there is no escape. I had come to this city alone, to be alone, but my solitude was illusion, a story I had told myself to convince myself of my strength. I had found a family, a family had found me. This Paritosh Shah was my friend, and he was my family. All the rest of them, Chotta Badriya and Kanta Bai and my boys, they were my family. I was a part of this family, and they wanted me married. I couldn’t ﬁght them. I was defeated. I nodded. I said, ‘All right. I’ll do what you want.’ 
While we looked for a girl we fell into a war. Paritosh Shah wanted my janampatri, he wanted to know about my parents and my gotra and my village. ‘Only by knowing a man’s past,’ he said, ‘can you settle his future.’ And I said, ‘Forget all that. I have none of that, I have money. Past is passed. Future is future, so make it for me.’ I believed then that a man can become anything he wants. I wanted it to be true: no past, any future. But Paritosh Shah, that fat bastard, that slippery Gujarati schemer, that faithful friend of mine, he looked at me as if I was crazy, and then dreamed a past for me. He ordered up a janampatri, a long roll which unfurled across the room, sprinkled with stars and secret hatchings and vermilion Sanskrit and all good things. ‘But not too perfect,’ he said. ‘Otherwise no Papa will believe it.’ So, according to Paritosh Shah, there had been bad times in my early youth, poverty and danger and near-death because of a rising Shani, but I had overcome these malign inevitabilities, I had faced down fate itself through the strength of my will and my single-hearted devotion to Krishna-maharaj, I had turned destiny through the energies of my uncountable devotions. This too he invented, all this, my God-fearing daily poojas, my temple-building, my love of Krishna. ‘It is good publicity, bhai,’ he said. ‘So give up your godless ways, nobody likes that stuff. People will think you are a communist, and anyway your 
 
children will need a good, God-fearing household.’ His special-order janampatri predicted many sons for me, and a daughter or two, and a long life of rising power and stability and eminence. Only one or two periods of illness were foreseen, like beauty-marks on a perfect face, and even these were easily surmounted through wearing of the right stones. Paritosh Shah rolled up the scroll with quick, practised little twirls of foreﬁngers and thumb, his underarms jiggling, and smiled at me. ‘You are a very eligible boy. You’ll get a queue of candidates, you wait.’ I had my doubts. We might have moved the planets to shine a golden light on my future, but the fact remained that men had died at my hands. The newspapers called me ‘Ganglord Gaitonde’. I was hated and feared. I knew this. And yet, the photographs came in. The Papas sent in pictures of their daughters, through intermediaries and marriage-brokers. Paritosh Shah spread a sheaf of them on his golden desk, like a pack of playing cards. ‘Choose,’ he said. I picked up the first one. She was sitting in front of a red backdrop, wearing a silky green sari with a gold dupatta, with her sleek hair pulled tightly back from a long forehead. ‘This one looks like a schoolteacher,’ I said. ‘So don’t choose that one. Make a shortlist. Then we’ll consider family background, education, nature of girl, horoscope, and move on from there.’ ‘Move on?’ ‘See the girls, of course.’ ‘We’ll go to her house? And she’ll bring in tea while her parents watch?’ ‘Yes, of course. What else?’ I ﬂicked the picture back on to the table, where it slid smoothly into the rest. ‘This is completely mad,’ I said. ‘What, marriage is mad? Bhai, the world does it. Prime ministers do it. Gods do it. I mean, what else are you going to do with your life? What else is a man born for?’ What is a man born for? I had no answer to this, and so I took the photos back home and laid them out on the ﬂoor of my room in rows of ten. They shivered in the draught from the air-conditioner, these faces patted smooth with powder, softly gleaming with hope. It was April, and without the blast of frigid air, even with the fan on ‘Full’, I sweated into my mattress, left damp stains on chairs. My blood was hot, and needed wintry air, more cold than this city could ever exhale. Outside, under the sun, my trousers stuck to my thighs and drove me into rages of restlessness, my shoes left red rings around my ankles. In these moods I was capable 
 
of rash anger and carelessness, so the boys had special power cables laid, and they knocked a new window into my bedroom wall for the machine, and so I was cooled. I was now comfortable and calm, and yet those faces on the ﬂoor were all the same to me, each was as good or bad as the next one. They were pretty enough, not phatakdi beautiful –who would want that in a wife? – but pleasant and welcoming and shy. They were sufﬁciently educated, well-cultured, no doubt each knew cooking and embroidery, they were all qualified, so why pick this one, and not that one? I waited for a sign from one of them, a wink of the eye as they ﬂuttered in the chill blast. And there I was, Ganesh Gaitonde, leader of my own company, master of thousands of lives, death-giver and generous benefactor, completely and wholly unable to make a decision. ‘Bhai, there’s trouble.’ Chotta Badriya was knocking urgently at the door. I called him in and he said it again. ‘Very big trouble.’ ‘What?’ ‘Tonight’s shipment, bhai. The police have it. They were waiting at Golghat. They were above the beach, behind that line of trees. They waited until all the maal was loaded into the trucks, then they came out and arrested everyone and took it all.’ All of it was forty lakhs worth of computer chips, vitamin B-complex tablets and video cameras. The maal was brought to the coast off the ﬁshing village of Golghat on a hundred-foot dhow, then put on neat little ﬁshing boats for the trip to the beach, where three trucks were waiting with plastic sheets on the flatbed, all ready for my precious cargo. But now the police had it. ‘They knew,’ I said. ‘They had information.’ ‘Yes,’ said Chotta Badriya. ‘It was only police? No customs?’ ‘Yes, only police.’ ‘Who was it?’ ‘Zone 13 officers. Kamath, Bhatia, Majid Khan, those fellows. Parulkar’s boys.’ We both knew what that might mean. It was possible that the police had their own sources who had tipped them off, or it could be that one of our rivals had given them my maal. At the time, there were four other big companies in Bombay, the Pathan company down in Grant Road, the Suleiman Isa outfit in Dongri and Jogeshwari and Dubai, the Prakash brothers and their company in the north-eastern suburbs and the Ahir company in Byculla. Any of those four – no, five, if you counted the 
 
Rakshaks – could have thought us tiny ﬁsh, easy to feast on. It wouldn’t be the Pathans, they were weak from their long war with Suleiman Isa, which they had barely survived. Any of the other companies could have thought of us as a tasty passing snack, we were by far the youngest, the most inexperienced, least connected, with the smallest money and weapons. Which was it? Parulkar had just come in as Assistant Commissioner in Zone 13, and he was said to be close to Suleiman Isa. And Suleiman Isa and his brothers headed the most politically connected, best-armed, largest gang that Bombay had ever seen. Maybe they saw us as a growing threat, and maybe they were trying to eat us. ‘Is that all we know?’ I said. ‘That’s all, bhai.’ I was so angry that I felt it as a pain in my joints, a shifting throb in my stomach. I wanted to kill someone. But slowly, slowly. Suleiman Isa was big. I had to know for sure. ‘Call Samant. Find him wherever he is. I need to speak to him.’ 
Who was hunting us? Samant investigated, inside the department, ﬁelding rumours, giving out a little cash here, a bottle of Black Label there. He had friends everywhere, constables and clerks and peons, and through these hands the secret would ﬁnally slip. But it was taking too long. There was a spy in my company, somewhere close to me, some chutiya who had sold the secret of my shipment, and with every passing minute the danger to me loomed and grew, like a leaning hill. I had to pick up the mountain, or it would topple and crush me. I could lift this weight, I knew it. But ﬁrst I had to ﬁnd the snake in my house, I had to crush his head. Where was he hiding? How to get him out in the open? In my air-conditioned room I slid the heads of the girls into patterns, formations, and thought. On the last day of May, I went to Paritosh Bhai. ‘I want to do something,’ I shouted at him. ‘I’m sitting here like a chutiya while a bunch of bhenchods laugh at me. My own boys are laughing at me.’ ‘Nobody’s laughing at you,’ he said. ‘Be patient. It’s a big matter, and nothing big gets done in a day.’ I was about to let loose at him again, but there was a knock at the door. Bada Badriya peered around the door, then let a timid little tailor into the room. Paritosh Bhai was getting fitted for new safari suits. The tailor stretched his tapes around him as Paritosh Shah kept up a rapid series of calls on his cordless phone. I sat and watched. He had been very busy 
 
recently, launching his airline. My fat man wanted to ﬂy. He had dozens of businesses, he gloried in his construction companies, his restaurants, his rental properties, his plastics factories, his garments factory near Ahmedabad, but he dreamt of soaring high above the earth, and so he had been appearing recently in all the newspapers, beauteous and polished from his gleamy hair to his gold chain with Krishna locket and the gold Rolex which set off all the birth stones on his fingers. There was some comfort for me in the thought of him ﬂying high above the stepped cliffs of Bombay’s buildings, above the brown lowlands of its bastis, of him hovering like a smooth and rotund balloon over it all, shading the city’s long-toothed silhouette in the benevolent umbra of his blue safari suit, more delightfully blue than the sun-bleached sky. Maybe one day his shadow would fall west and north, all the way to Delhi, and beyond. He had the intelligence, the ambition, and a clear cold eye. But for now the airline would extend its service from Bombay to Ahmedabad and Baroda. He was arranging the celebrations and formalities surrounding the maiden ﬂight. ‘Listen,’ he was saying. ‘Just listen. I knew that randi when she would suck a lauda for a whole night for five thousand rupees. Now she’s become such a big star that she wants three lakhs to sit on a plane for an hour? To cut one ribbon? Be serious.’ He was talking to Sonam Bhandari’s secretary, negotiating a personal appearance. He listened, then settled into his no-nonsense negotiating voice. ‘I can give one lakh. I’m starting an airline, not a fund for starlets who are already ﬁnished. One lakh.’ The tailor was measuring from waist to floor now. ‘How much? Okay. One-ﬁfty. Done. I’ll send over ﬁfty thousand today. Okay.’ He put the phone down. ‘Done,’ he said to me. ‘A film star will come for the ﬂight. We shall be on TV.’ ‘You be on TV,’ I said. ‘I’m not coming anywhere near your ﬂight.’ ‘Not even with Sonam Bhandari on it?’ he said. ‘If you see her jiggle those coconuts, you’ll forget all about your shipment.’ ‘No woman has coconuts good enough to make me forget that.’ He was quiet until the tailor gathered up his scribblings and samples and left. ‘You’ve done everything that can be done,’ he said. ‘Now we just have to wait.’ And wait and wait and wait. Waiting was grindingly hard for me. ‘Listen,’ I said. ‘I don’t want to wait. We have to do something.’ ‘At times like these, we need help,’ he said, looking crafty. ‘Let’s do a puja.’ 
 
‘Fine.’ ‘What, really? You mean that?’ That he was amazed was only natural: in all our years I had never said a prayer, never begged for divine favours, had eaten prasad only as a quick snack. But now he wasn’t interested in my reasons, just in moving fast through this unexpected opening. He was picking up one of his phones already. ‘We’ll do a Satyanarayan Katha. I know just the pandit. You’ll see, all his kathas bear fruit without fail. Not to worry. Before you blink we’ll be on top of the situation.’ He was smiling at me most benevolently. I could see the story he had in his head, hear the katha he was going to tell as resoundingly as if he was loud-speakering it into my ear: Bhai has come home, he was going to tell the boys, he has come home to the Lord, by the grace of God he has been woken up, in his heart devotion has come alive like a ﬂame. The truth was that I didn’t feel very lit-up, just inert. I had the sensation of drowning slowly, and as the water eased over my cheeks I had ﬂung up a hand and clutched at whatever was ﬂoating by. This puja was a twig, and I grasped it. 
I could see the heavy boat motionless on the shifting silver surfaces of the enormous waters. Paritosh Shah had picked a bhaiyya pandit for his puja, so I could understand the katha in Hindi without effort. This pandit was a very dramatic story-teller, and he was doing the Satyanarayan Katha with vivid expression, with different voices for the characters and full Dilip Kumar expressions, and now we were at the part where the trader and his son-in-law were on their way home with a boat laden with gold and pearls and perfumes and ivory, all the weighty profits of a long, windy voyage away from home. Then a dandi-swami appeared on the bank, crafty old Satyanarayan himself in disguise, to ask the simple question, ‘Bachcha, what’s in the boat?’ And the businessman, afraid of having to give alms, greedy short-sighted bastard, said, ‘Oh, nothing, Swami-ji, just some lata-pata,’ and the dandi-swami nodded and said ‘Tathastu’ and the boat was indeed suddenly bobbing up like a cork, ﬁlled now only with ﬂuffy grass and dry hay. The dandi-swami now went into a deep meditative trance, and exactly at that moment, before we could get to the businessman’s final comeuppance and regret, Chotta Badriya tapped me on the shoulder, and whispered, ‘Come, bhai.’ Outside the room, he gave me a phone. I took the call with Paritosh Shah and Chotta Badriya and his brother Bada Badriya watching. It was our breakthrough. The night before, one of our landing agents from Golghat had spent the night with a girl named Simky in Colaba. This 
 
landing agent, one Konkani named Ashok Khot, had been on our payroll for four years. Last evening, he had come to Bombay to put his wife on a train to Delhi, where she was going for her brother’s daughter’s wedding. She had gone off on the Rajdhani, well-settled with her two sons in the chair car, and then Khot had decided to partake of the delights of the city. He had called this Simky from the station itself, then picked her up an hour later in front of the Lido Bar, near Regal. Khot was flush with money. He had arranged for a private air-conditioned taxi with darkened windows, and he took her for dinner to Khyber, and then for a drive down Marine Drive. All during dinner he drank Johnny Walker Black and told her stories about men he had fooled and money he had made and high officers he had ruined, and in the car, between massaging her mausambis and laughing at jokes he never ﬁnished, he took sips from a silver glass attached to a ﬂask by a silver chain. She lay back in the seat and listened, humming along with the songs on the cassette player. They ate kulﬁ at Chowpatty, and he staggered to the water and tried to sing a song, and then threw up into the sea, and then drank another peg just to show how much of a man he was. On the way back, he had the driver turn up Makhmali andhera and opened fully Simky’s choli and was nuzzling into her with small slobbering sounds and babbling softly, and under the music she heard it, ‘Saali, you better be good to me, do you know who I am? Nobody can look cross-eyed at me in this city. Masood Meetha himself comes to my house.’ In the hotel room in Colaba, Khot looked dully at her while he pawed at her skirt, and then he slid slowly to the side and fell fast asleep. Simky took his shoes off, and his socks, then tugged off his pants and Jockey underwear. She found twenty-four thousand rupees in ﬁve-hundred-rupee notes in his various pockets, of which she counted off ﬁve thousand, which she hid deep in her red purse. From this purse she carefully extracted a small paper pudi, and from it pinched a judicious nip of brown sugar and breathed it up her nostrils, sending a voluptuous shudder through her breasts. Then she lay back and slept. In the morning, Khot turned over and stretched, and she kept herself still despite the gutter-reek of his breath. When he tried to climb on to her, she turned her head and winced and in a little-Simky voice said, ‘Raja, you made me so sore last night, I can’t take any more, really I can’t.’ He laughed proudly, and magnanimously let her off. The next day she had lunch with one of our boys, Bunty Arora, from GTB Nagar. When Simky had first come from Chandigarh, Bunty had taken care of her, she had been his chavvi. Now he wouldn’t touch her, she had a nasty brown-sugar 
 
habit, but still there was the feeling for an old mashooq, and occasionally when he was on that side of town, he looked her up. She told him about her night with Khot. Now, our Bunty had been the one who had introduced Khot to Simky. So he said, ‘That bevda bastard, he’s unbearable when he starts drinking.’ And she said, ‘Yes, he talks and talks, he won’t stop! I’m this, I’m that, nobody had better look at me, Masood Meetha comes to my house. I wanted to hit him on the head with a cricket bat.’ She tossed her hair, and for a moment she had that old Simky ﬁre. Then she went back to her golden falooda and foggy humming. Our Bunty, he kept his face calm, and moved the conversation on, talked about films and stars and this and that, and when they had ﬁnished lunch, he saw her off and then walked to the nearest shop and made a phone call. Just as the dandi-swami was saying, ‘Tathastu.’ So there it was. Masood Meetha was Suleiman Isa’s number one man in the city, had been ever since Suleiman himself had taken off for Dubai. The enemy who had stolen our goods was Suleiman Isa, he and his bastard brothers. I put the phone down and said this to Paritosh Shah and Bada Badriya and Chotta Badriya. ‘It’s Suleiman,’ I said. ‘Are you sure?’ Chotta Badriya said. ‘Of course I’m sure. I was sure of it before, now we have proof. That bhenchod Parulkar and Suleiman have been close for years and years.’ This was common knowledge, and Chotta Badriya’s face showed it, he looked down and was quiet. Parulkar and Suleiman had risen together, or at least in parallel. Many of Parulkar’s most famous arrests and encounters had been based on intelligence passed to him by Suleiman, and those who had gone to prison or bled out their lives in some lane had been the enemies of Suleiman, his rivals, or just those who had grown big enough to be seen by him as competitors. He and his clan had eaten up many in this city, they had grown fat on this daily diet, and they swaggered through the streets. Suleiman Isa and his many brothers, the Nawabs of Bombay. ‘I am going to kill them all,’ I said. The fan was skipping above us, aslant in its fast circle and letting out a periodic creak. This was the only sound. This was very serious. The Pathans had fought a war against Suleiman, had killed one of his brothers and many of his boys, but he had struck back and bled them weak. Finally a truce had been called, and the ﬁring had halted, no more pistols snapping away in restaurants and AK-47s at petrol pumps, but the Pathans were left crippled. It was madness to doubt Suleiman’s will, or his brain, or his wealth, or his contacts in the police and in the ministries. So 
 
my friends were quiet. Finally Paritosh Shah said, ‘There’s no other choice.’ War comes upon us. We are led in leaning curves towards the battlefield. You may try to avoid it, but find that last flower-lined turn you chose was really an entrance into a blood-soaked arena. So we were here. ‘Good,’ I said. ‘Let’s start.’ 
We were victorious at first. We had the advantage of surprise. On that very ﬁrst day, I had Khot picked up. His wife was still in Delhi, so some of the boys just went over to his house that night and picked him up from his bed, lifted him and brought him to me. I didn’t want him in my home, so we dealt with him outside, behind the house. At ﬁrst he tried to tell me that he didn’t know anything about any Suleiman Isa, why would I think that he would even try anything as low and crazy as that, everyone knew he had been faithful to Ganesh Bhai for years and years, he swore on the heads of his children. Finally, the shameless bhenchod, he tried a religion angle. ‘Why would I go with that kattu bastard?’ he said. ‘Ganesh Bhai, think about it. Like you I’m a God-fearing man. Every week I give to the temple. This is only some Muslim plot to break our friendship.’ I hit him so hard I skinned a knuckle. ‘Listen, you bastard,’ I said, and then was too angry, I felt my blood swell up behind my eyes. ‘Beat him’ was all I could say. ‘Beat him,’ I said, and walked away. He made coughing, gasping noises, and called on his father. ‘Papa, Papa,’ he wept. That was interesting. Pain makes babies of most men, and their mothers are usually who they cry out for. Maybe Khot didn’t have a mother. I went back and watched, rubbing my hand. When I pressed at the second knuckle on my right hand a hot fan of pain bloomed into my hand. I pressed harder. Now it was a cold movement, quick and edged and stabbing into my wrist. It was a slippery tooth just under the skin, biting. Under the quick rain of kicks, Khot was convulsing on the ground. I pressed harder. He broke ﬁrst. He told us everything. There wasn’t that much to tell. He and Masood Meetha had known each other since they were young men. The families were from adjoining villages originally, somewhere near the coast. Masood had approached him a year and a half earlier, in Bombay, had called and invited him for tea and biscuits in his Dongri ofﬁce. Khot had refused to meet in Dongri, so they had chai at a cheap restaurant in Ghatkopar. All they had done that ﬁrst time was talk about Konkani villages and the food and whatever happened to old so-and-so whose father 
 
was a postman. Then, a month later, late at night, Masood had casually stopped by Khot’s house near Golghat, on the spur of the moment, he just happened to be near by, and he had asked for dinner, for all the traditional Konkani dishes that Khot’s wife could make, and so then he had Bhabhi’s cooking which was just like his mother’s. After this dinner, there had been phone calls and gifts of watches and bottles of whisky, but never any face-to-face contact. Khot was no innocent, he knew from the very ﬁrst sip of Meetha’s tea during that ﬁrst meeting what this whole game was about, why after all these years Masood Meetha had remembered him. And when it came time to make arrangements for my shipment, my forty-lakh shipment, it was Khot who picked up the phone and called Masood, ‘Bhai, shall we have dinner?’ He cried and told us all of this. ‘Kill him,’ I said. I turned and walked away, and before I was at the steps leading to the back door, it was done. Two ﬂat thumps and Khot was done. Chotta Badriya followed me inside, and I heard the snick of the safety before he put his Glock back under his shirt. ‘Don’t dispose of the body yet,’ I said. ‘We’ll send it back to Suleiman tomorrow. Afterwards.’ ‘Afterwards,’ he said, and grinned. So we set to work. We had been preparing. We had our lists, our hand-drawn maps, our information. So we set up our ﬁelding. The next day, between eight in the morning and four in the afternoon, we killed Vinay Shukla, Salim Sheikh, Syed Munir, Munna, Zahed Mechanic and Praful Bidaye. That same night Samant encountered Azam Lamboo and Pankaj Kamath, for which action he got big stories in the papers, ‘Encounter King Guns Down Top Suleiman Shooters’, and three lakhs from me. And that same night, actually at fourthirty in the morning, a car pulled up to the corner near the Imperial Hotel in Dongri and Khot slid out on to the pavement, his head wrapped in a crusted towel. So, we told them who we were. We wrote our answers in blood. What I wanted was Suleiman’s head, to kick around like a football. But he was safe in Dubai, where he had gone after the Pathans had killed his brother, after he had killed many of them. Bombay had become too dangerous for him, and so he had fled, the bhadwa, but still he ran his operations in the city, through Masood Meetha and others. We were braced for their assault, and for a day we waited, and then sure enough it came. They ambushed three of our boys as they left a relative’s house in Malad. All three of ours died, all three before they could draw their pistols. Ajay Kumble, Noble Lobo, Amir Kenkda. The next day Parulkar’s inspectors were waiting in ambush for our weekly collection run to Darya 
 
Mahal Bazaar, where the shopkeepers had their contributions ready. The police party, led by Majid Khan the muchchad, were dressed as labourers. They gave no warning, and fired thirty-four bullets. Vinay Karmarkar, Shailendra Pawar, Ziauddin Qazalbash. So we fought Suleiman Isa through the summer, and into the monsoon floods. When we collected our bodies from the morgue, carried them through the white waterfalls of water, it seemed as if we had been ﬁghting them for ever, that the war had always existed. They hurt us, but they couldn’t kill us. And we ate away at them, we bled them a little every day. Meanwhile Paritosh Shah’s Rajhans Airline ﬂew, and he got hair implants because he decided he looked too old on television, and he gave me lectures every day on the power of his dandi-swami. ‘You saw how he answered your need. You asked and he gave. Now how can you not believe?’ I was tempted to believe. But early in my life, I had seen how belief was an inner rot that hollowed out a man and made him a eunuch. I knew faith was a convenient crutch for cowards and weaklings. No, I wanted no such disease inside me. So I resisted, I argued coincidence to myself, that the fact that our information had come to us during the puja was clearly a trick of unconnected movements shifting past each other in a way that made sense only to me, random particles bumping themselves into an illusion that seemed like a shape. And what about the thousands of moments in every minute where there were no connections, no sparkling threads of meaning from one event to the next? Paritosh Shah saw Dandi-swami behind the flashing face of every second, he entreated him with gifts and bhajans, and pressured him with stones and charms and secret mantras, and quarrelled with him on occasion. And always he then apologized to Dandi-swami and ﬂew on the wings of his blessings. He was convinced that if only I would let go of my resistance and fall into marriage, I would automatically slide into belief. ‘Once you are well-settled,’ he said, ‘all this nonsense will settle itself also. One-two, like that it’ll happen.’ And he snapped his fingers, one-two. Every day he asked me for my shortlist of girls. So the year wore on. September, October. In early November Samant called. We had been doing business all during this struggle and had profited mutually, him in cash, me in dead bodies. But it had become harder for us to meet face to face since we had both been written about in the newspapers. We were trapped by fame. Only Bombay-fame so far, not allIndia, but it was enough to make us very careful. So we spoke on the phone, on numbers we changed every week. 
 
What Samant had to say was simple enough. A month after the seizure of my shipment, the government had distributed monies worth almost a fourth of its value to various ofﬁcers and a certain anonymous informant. We knew that this unnamed bastard was not Khot or his survivors – we had kept a careful watch on them. So who was it, this gaandu who had taken what was mine? Now Samant had a name: ‘Kishorilal Ganpat’. I knew the name. All of Bombay did. He was a builder, for ten years now he had spread his constructions across the east of the city. From the highway you could see his buildings rearing their heads out of the green ﬁelds, above the villages and the old colonies. He was big. There had been talk of his dealings with Suleiman, but their interaction had been just ordinary, of the necessary sort, what any builder would have with Suleiman Isa in the normal course of events. Nothing close, nothing special. We ourselves had talked to Kishorilal Ganpat when he needed some help with clearing slums from four residential plots in Andheri. But if he had taken my money, if he had stolen from me, he was closer to Suleiman than anyone had known. This meant he was a banker for Suleiman, that he ate from the same plate as that maderchod. I thanked Samant, and hung up. His reward would follow later, and we had nothing else to talk about. I had the option to swallow this news quietly, to forget that I had heard it, and I also had the option to act. I kept the information to myself, locked it away in my stomach. I wanted to think it over carefully. Just before dawn the phone rang again. Another one of ours was dead. This was a boy from Gopalmath itself, a boy I had seen growing up in the lanes I had built. His name was Ravi Rathore, and he had come back on the bus from Aurangabad, where he had relatives. Suleiman Isa’s dogs had picked him up in Dadar at the bus station. An ice-cream-wallah had noticed some pushing and shoving. There had been a black van parked near by. At one in the morning someone had noticed a body in a reeking pile of garbage near the highway in Goregaon East and had made an anonymous call to the police. There was a bullet hole in each of Ravi Rathore’s thighs, and one in his forehead. We brought back the body, to his kholi, in the late afternoon. He had no relatives in Bombay, so I gave the ﬁre to his pyre. The body in its white shroud was tiny under the wood, under the spray of ﬂame. He had been very skinny, Ravi Rathore, with a chest bent inwards, and his favourite belt with heavy silver buckles used to wrap nearly twice around him. When the boys played cricket on Sundays on the sloping pitch close to the hill, running between the wick
 
ets made Ravi Rathore heave and pant. Now he was dead. We burnt him and came home. I sat on my chair, on the terrace, and watched the night come again. This valley we live and die in is a valley of light and shade. We flicker in and out of it. How easily Ravi Rathore gave up his small space in it. I turned away tea, and dinner, and remembered a monsoon long ago, and Ravi Rathore’s skinny legs in shorts, paddling in a ﬂooded corner between two twisting lanes. That was what I knew of him, that and his belt and his wheezing enthusiasm for cricket. ‘What are you thinking of, bhai?’ said Chotta Badriya. He was sitting on the ﬂoor, at the end of the terrace. ‘Bachcha, what’s in the boat?’ ‘What?’ ‘I’m thinking of Dandi-swami.’ Chotta Badriya ducked his head down low, rubbed at his ankles. He was trying to decide where my temper was, if he could risk another question. He picked at the roof, took up a ﬂake with his ﬁngernail. ‘Leave my house alone,’ I said. ‘Here’s what we’re going to do. We’re going to sink a boat.’ 
Kishorilal Ganpat was a great Shiva-bhakta. He thanked Bholenath every morning for all the crores he had swindled, for the bribes he had given, for sand-mixed cement, for shoddy wiring that spilt out of rough-ﬁnished walls, for illegal and unlicensed buildings, for encroachments, for extra ﬂoors towering far beyond FSI limits, for middle-class money desperate for homes, for starving labour, for slums, for tough, sword-swinging boys, for Suleiman Isa. Kishorilal Ganpat was properly careful in these bad times, so he had two sinewy bodyguards who were so tight-muscled that they walked wide-legged, like somebody had tweaked a rubber band around each of their golis. Kishorilal Ganpat also liked appearances to be just so, so he dressed the driver of his Mercedes in a white suit and a cap, and the two bodyguards in grey safari suits. Kishorilal Ganpat was also a hoarder of time. He collected short-cuts that saved two minutes or three in this jangling maderchod jam of a city, he gave speeches to his employees about Japanese punctuality, he came to the Shiva temple on Satyagrahi Jamunanath Lane every Tuesday morning at eight-thirty precisely, on the ‘dot of the dot of eight-thirty’, as he liked to point out to anyone listening. All of which made the game childishly easy for us. We set up our ﬁelding. Six boys, six Star pistols. We knew where Shiva sat, on his pedestal, we knew the steps that led down to the lane lined with 
 
houses and hawkers, we knew where the Mercedes would wait for its master, we knew where the bodyguards would be. It went smooth, like an oiled lauda into a wet chut. Kishorilal Ganpat came down the steps, holding his prasad aloft on a special silver thali. He had positioned his shoes pointing outwards at the bottom of the steps, and he stepped into them efﬁciently, saving a good three seconds. The bodyguards were bent over still, their backs to their boss as they pulled on their sandals, and Kishorilal Ganpat was stepping high, skipping over a puddle of water, when my boy Bunty moved sideways and into his path, and Kishorilal Ganpat turned his head to look, and Bunty raised his right arm and blew out Kishorilal Ganpat’s left eye. One of the bodyguards reached under his shirt and was cut down. The other sat down on the temple steps and never raised his hands from the stone, which he grasped with whitened ﬁngernails. Meanwhile Kishorilal Ganpat staggered and stumbled at the corners of the lane, from door to door, looking for a way out, any way out. Bunty walked after him, squeezing rounds tenderly into his back and buttocks. Finally Kishorilal Ganpat knelt in front of a vermilion door, under an elegantly painted Om in white, his head down and gaand high in the air, his clothes soaked through with blood, quite dead. Bunty and the boys walked away, not too fast, not too slow. The exit was as uncomplicated as the job, they got into two cars and left. They then left the two cars on a corner in Malad and got into a van. In three hours they were all out of the city. And those of us who stayed behind grew careful. We knew we had escalated, and so we were prepared. I lived now in three different houses, and went between them at unequal intervals. Paritosh Shah dreamed of ﬂight in a lumbering Mercedes ﬁtted out with armour plate and hardened windows. Chotta Badriya had boys taking strolls through far lanes, watching over our interests. The death of Kishorilal Ganpat moved from the front pages to smaller squares at the back of the newspapers, and then finally disappeared altogether. Apart from two encounters executed by Parulkar’s people, which lost us three boys, life went on as ever before. Don’t get complacent, I told my boys every day. Don’t go to sleep. They aren’t sleeping for sure, they’re preparing something. It’ll come: the axe, the bullet, the fall. It must. We are making war with Suleiman Isa. Suleiman Isa. Ganesh Gaitonde: the name had a heft, a certain sturdiness. It stood up straight, it didn’t back down, it was a strong name. In print it had a certain symmetrical solidity, and it rang on the ear like the double clash of a nagada. People trusted it, and people were afraid of it. And yet: Suleiman 
 
Isa. All those hissing ‘s’ sounds, they spoke of cunning. Mean, twisty, ratskinned cunning. Which caught up with us one morning in late November. I was phoned minutes after it happened. Paritosh Shah left the ofﬁces of Rajhans Airlines in his impregnable Mercedes. Security guards swung shut the double gates behind the car as it accelerated tank-like down the lane. In the front seat there was a driver, an old trusted employee, and a bodyguard, not Bada Badriya, who was on a week-long holiday in his village in UP, but a stand-in named Patkar. Paritosh Shah sat in the back, entering names into an electronic diary he had received that morning on special order from Singapore. He wanted to do business from the car, make even more money. The lane from Rajhans swung left on to Ambedkar Road. Just as the Mercedes approached the intersection, a van pulled out behind it, and pressed close. And a truck slammed across the lane, blocking the turn, trapping the Mercedes between its side and the van: no way forward, no way back. The van crashed against the back bumper, shoved the Mercedes forward into the truck. Bullets exploded the rear tires. Then there were two men swinging sledgehammers against the Mercedes’ left rear window, which, for all its bullet-proof hardening, starred and curved concave under the blows. The bodyguard had his pistol out, but there was a man pointing an AK-47 at him through the window. To protect Paritosh Shah, Patkar had to lower the window, which would let in the AK-47. The bodyguard pointed his pistol, but the front window stayed up. Meanwhile the sledgehammers crunched on the back window. Paritosh Shah ﬂopped about on the back seat and stabbed his mobile phone with scrabbling fingers. Then, at the top of a large inward bulge in the rear window, a small hole crumbled open under the sledgehammers, a hole about the size of a rupee coin. Enough for a muzzle to press in, a second AK-47. An entire magazine was ﬁred into the car. The bodyguard tried to fire, to shoot at the braying blaze that sprayed into the inside of the Mercedes, but his bullets stopped nothing, and may themselves have bounced around on the inside of the car. My boys tried to stop me from going there, from going to my friend. I shoved them aside and drove myself. I was there minutes after the police arrived, and they at least didn’t try to stop me. The rear and side windows of the Mercedes were webbed crystalline, smeared on the inside with a dark jelly. The front left door was open. The driver had survived, and had crawled over the dead bodyguard to get out after the booming ﬁre had stopped. I leaned into the car, rested a hand on the satiny leather of the front headrest, and looked into the leg-space at the back. There was no 
 
Paritosh Shah there. There was a mass of deﬂated ﬂesh, punctured and holed and ripped. There was no face there. Under a broad forehead, a splintered bowl of uncooked meat, shards of sharp white bone. No Paritosh Shah. He could never have ﬁtted into that small ﬂume behind the seat, not Paritosh Shah, not my fat man. But there was a hand with rings, with shiny protective stones. Here was a foot, still in its new tasselled burgundy loafer. He had said that word to me, with much indulgent patience: ‘Not red, bhai, that’s called burgundy. Burr-gandy.’ Here was a styled thatch of dark hair. But where was Paritosh Shah? Not here. 
I went to his house, where the women said nothing to me. Yet I felt their hate. He had died because of me. He had died for me. I had killed him. Nobody dared say it, but it needed no saying. When his body lay in the courtyard, wrapped in white sheets, covered everywhere, while his daughters wailed, nobody said it. Near the heat of the pyre nobody said it. I went back to Gopalmath without hearing it said, and yet it echoed along each whistle of my breath, each squeeze of my pulse. I drank whisky. I told the boys to bring me something, anything, as long as it was here, right now. Now. My throat burnt from the whisky and I saw myself dying. I was knifed, sabred, shot, hanged. My body fell. And then fell again. Bullets separated my elbows, cut my torso in half. I welcomed each fall. Where was death? This life squeezed my head in its iron hoop. Paritosh Shah’s plump flesh emptied of blood, of air. How life lets out. How it goes. Does the spillage make a sound? Or was there only the breaking crack of the bullets? I raised my hand, brought it close to my eyes, pressed my face into the springy growth of hair on the forearm, felt the life in it. Each follicle was alive. A turn of my other wrist broke the whisky glass on a bedpost. With a splinter shaped like a half-moon I cut at the ridge of muscle under my clenched ﬁst. Through the serried stalks of the hair I went, and the blood seeped noiselessly. I turned the arm, and there was the bumping of the pulse on the wrist. Easy to cut, to cease. How easy. And then I was disgusted with myself. Paritosh Shah had lived. He had lived fully, he had fed his women, his children, his hundreds of employees. He had fed the world, and even as he had died, he had fought to dial his phone, to say something. He had tried to call me. I knew this. Not his wife, not his children, it was me. What would he have said, through that miraculous leap of electricity, over the distance? Death was already on him, and I could not have saved him. He must have known that. What would he 
 
have said, at the end? To me, his friend? I looked into the broken curve of glass, speckled with my blood, and I knew. I crawled to the other end of the bed, found the pile of photographs. From the middle of the stack, without looking, by feel alone, I pulled one. And I called to the boys. ‘That’s the one I want,’ I said to Chotta Badriya, who was sitting with half a dozen others, cleaning his pistol. They were all puzzled. They had been expecting a war meeting. Whenever we had lost someone in this ﬁght, after the funeral we always gathered to pick our hits for the next day, the next week. Who to kill, and how, that’s what we talked about. But now I wanted a woman. Chotta Badriya picked up the photograph from the table, where I had dropped it. ‘Now, bhai?’ ‘No, no, not like that.’ I could see he thought I wanted a midnight ride, a quick relieving of my tensions, but this was a respectable-looking girl, and he was puzzled. I thumped him gently on the shoulder. ‘Not that, dhakkan. Paritosh Bhai wanted this. And Dandi-swami. I want to marry her.’ 
Her name was Subhadra Devalekar, and I married her four days later. At ﬁrst, her father thought it callous that I should marry so soon after my friend’s death. I know most of my boys felt this also. But I explained, that this was my friend’s last wish, and then they remembered all his lectures, his shortlist, his nagging. A rumour appeared out of nowhere, and hardened into a certainty, that he had actually called me from the Mercedes, as the hammer-blows had rung on his life, and managed to say to me, ‘You must marry.’ So by the time we walked around the ﬁre, Subhadra and I, our marriage had become an act of adherence to a dead friend’s last wish. The boys came out, in their dozens and dozens, from all over the city, and watched our austere ceremony at Gopalmath temple with moistening eyes, with ready pistols, with ferocious loyalty. After the ceremony we sat in front of the house and the people of Gopalmath came to pay their respects. Subhadra’s father collected envelopes. He was a bus conductor who had retired from the 523 route, and he had four daughters. He had been hesitant at first when Chotta Badriya had come calling, after all the afternoon tabloids were still publishing pictures of the ‘Death Mercedes’, but a stack of ﬁve-hundred-rupee bricks on his tea tray had persuaded him. Daughters are a care. Now the bus conductor stood to my right and took the gift envelopes from the line of well-wishers. Bada Badriya came forward with 
 
a fat red envelope. He had rushed back from his village as soon as we had contacted him, and was still ashamed at letting his boss out of his care, I could see that. But he hadn’t been back to his village for ﬁve years, and what had happened was no fault of his. I told him that and hugged him. And then I was sitting on a bed, a bed strewn with rose petals. A song played somewhere, a flute threaded through it. On a corner of the bed there was a huddled red tent of a sari, holding within it a trembling, skinny body. My wife. I was married. My head was ﬂoaty, as if I had just woken from a long dream. I asked: how did this happen? There was no answer. 
 